<<<JP580>>>
Faults, Errors, and Error Codes
567
integrated circuits are extremely reliable, faults (deviations from speciﬁed or correct
functional behavior) do occur in the course of lengthy computations, especially in sys-
tems that operate under harsh environmental conditions, deal with extreme/unpredictable
loads, or are used during long missions. The output of an AND gate may become per-
manently “stuck on 1,” thus yielding an incorrect output when at least one input is 0.
Furthermore, cross talk or external interference may cause the AND gate to suffer a
“transient fault” in which its output becomes incorrect for only a few clock cycles. A
table entry may become corrupt as a result of manufacturing imperfections in the memory
cells or logic faults in the read/write circuitry. Because of overheating, a manufacturing
defect, or a combination of both, a wire may break or short-circuit to another wire.
Ensuring correct functioning of digital systems in the presence of (permanent and
transient) faults is the subject of the fault-tolerant computing discipline, also known
as reliable (dependable) computing [Parh94]. In this chapter, we review some ideas in
fault-tolerant computing that are particularly relevant to the computation of arithmetic
functions.
Methods of detecting or correcting data errors have their origins in the ﬁeld of
communications. Early communications channels were highly unreliable and extremely
noisy. So signals sent from one end were often distorted or changed by the time they
reached the receiving end. The remedy, thought up by communications engineers, was
to encode the data in redundant formats known as “codes” or “error codes.” Examples
of coding methods include adding a parity bit (an example of a single-error-detecting or
SED code), checksums, and Hamming single-error-correcting, double-error-detecting
(SEC/DED) code. Today, error-detecting and error-correcting codes are still used exten-
sively in communications, for even though the reliability of these systems and noise
reduction/shielding methods have improved enormously, so have the data rates and data
transmission volumes, making the error probability nonnegligible.
Codes originally developed for communications can be used to protect against stor-
age errors. When the early integrated-circuit memories proved to be less reliable than
the then-common magnetic core technology, integrated circuit designers were quick to
incorporate SEC/DED codes into their designs.
The data processing cycle in a system whose storage and memory-to-processor data
transfers are protected by an error code can be represented as in Fig. 27.1. In this
scheme, which is routinely applied to modern digital systems, the data manipulation
part is unprotected. Decoding/encoding is necessary because common codes are not
closed under arithmetic operations. For example, the sum of two even-parity numbers
does not necessarily have even parity. As another example, when we change an element
within a list that is protected by a checksum, we must compute a new checksum that
replaces the old one.
One way to protect the arithmetic computation against fault-induced errors is to
use duplication with comparison of the two results (for single fault/error detection) or
triplication with 2-out-of-3 voting on the three results (for single fault masking or error
correction). Figure 27.2 shows possible ways for implementing such duplication and
triplication schemes.
In Fig. 27.2a, the decoding logic is duplicated along with the arithmetic logic unit
(ALU), to ensure that a single fault in the decoder does not go undetected. The encoder,
on the other hand, remains a critical element whose failure will lead to undetected errors.

<<<JP581>>>
568
Chapter 27 Fault-Tolerant Arithmetic
Protected
     by 
encoding
Input
Encode
Send
Store
Send
Decode
Output
Manipulate
Unprotected
     
Figure 27.1 A common way of applying information coding techniques.
Figure 27.2
Arithmetic fault
detection or fault
tolerance (masking)
with replicated units.
Coded
inputs
Decode
    1
Decode
    2
ALU
  1
ALU
  2
Compare
Mismatch
detected
Encode
Coded
outputs
Coded
inputs
Decode
    1
Decode
    2
ALU
  1
ALU
  2
Decode
    3
ALU
  3
Vote
Encode
Coded
outputs
Non-codeword
detected
Non-codeword
detected
(a) Duplication and comparison
(b) Triplication and voting

<<<JP582>>>
Faults, Errors, and Error Codes
569
However, since the output of the encoder is redundant (coded), it is possible to design the
encoding circuitry in a way that ensures the production of a non-codeword at its output if
anything goes wrong. Such a design, referred to as self-checking, leads to error detection
by the checker associated with the memory subsystem or later when the erroneous stored
value is used as an input to the ALU. Assuming the use of a self-checking encoder, the
duplicated design in Fig. 27.2a can detect any error resulting from a fault that is totally
conﬁned within one of the blocks shown in the diagram. This includes the “compare”
block whose failure may produce a false alarm. An undetected mismatch would require
at least two faults in separate blocks.
The design with triplicated ALU in Fig. 27.2b is similar. Here, the voter is a critical
element and must be designed with care. Self-checking design cannot be applied to
the voter (as used here), since its output is nonredundant. However, by combining the
voting and encoding functions, one may be able to design an efﬁcient self-checking voter-
encoder. This three-channel computation strategy can be generalized to n channels to
permit the tolerance of more faults. However, the cost overhead of a higher degree of
replication becomes prohibitive.
Since the preceding replication schemes involve signiﬁcant hardware overheads, one
might attempt to apply coding methods for fault detection or fault tolerance within the
ALU. The ﬁrst issue we encounter in trying to use this approach is that single, double,
burst, and other error types commonly dealt with in communications do not provide
useful characterizations for arithmetic. Whereas a spike due to noise may affect a single
bit (random error) or a small number of consecutive bits (burst error), a single erroneous
carry signal within an adder (caused, e.g., by a faulty gate in the carry logic) may produce
an arbitrary number of bit inversions in the output. Figure 27.3 provides an example.
We see in the example of Fig. 27.3 that a single fault in the adder has caused 12 of the
sum bits to be inverted. In coding theory parlance, we say that the Hamming distance
between the correct and incorrect results is 12 or that the error has a Hamming weight
(number of 1s in the XOR of the two values) of 12.
Error detection and correction capabilities of codes can be related to the minimum
Hamming distance between codewords as exempliﬁed by the following:
Single-error-detecting (SED)
Min. Hamming distance = 2
Single-error-correcting (SEC)
Min. Hamming distance = 3
SEC/DED
Min. Hamming distance = 4
Figure 27.3 How a
single carry error can
produce an arbitrary
number of bit-errors
(inversions) in
the sum.
Unsigned addition
0010 0111 0010 0001
+ 0101 1000 1101 0011
Correct sum
0111 1111 1111 0100
Erroneous sum
1000 0000 0000 0100
Stage generating an
erroneous carry of 1

<<<JP583>>>
570
Chapter 27 Fault-Tolerant Arithmetic
For example, in the case of SED codes, any 1-bit inversion in a codeword is guaranteed
not to change it to another codeword, thus leading to error detection. For SEC, a 1-bit
inversion leads to an invalid word that is closer (in terms of Hamming distance) to the
original correct codeword than to any other valid codeword, thus allowing for error
correction.
From the addition example in Fig. 27.3, we see that even if some “single-error-
detecting code” were closed under addition, it would be incapable of detecting the
erroneous result in this case. We note, however, that in our example, the erroneous
sum differs from the correct sum by 24. Since in computer arithmetic we deal with
numbers as opposed to arbitrary bit strings, it is the numerical difference between the
erroneous and correct values that is of interest to us, not the number of bits in which they
differ.
Accordingly, we deﬁne the arithmetic weight of an error as the minimum number
of signed powers of 2 that must be added to the correct value to produce the erroneous
result (or vice versa). Here are two examples:
Correct result
0111 1111 1111 0100
1101 1111 1111 0100
Erroneous result
1000 0000 0000 0100
0110 0000 0000 0100
Difference (error)
16 = 24
−32 752 = −215 + 24
Error, in minimum-
0000 0000 0001 0000
-1000 0000 0001 0000
weight BSD form
Arithmetic weight
1
2
of the error
Type of error
Single, positive
Double, negative
Hence, the errors in the preceding examples can be viewed as “single” and “double”
errors in the arithmetic sense. Special arithmetic error codes have been developed that
are capable of detecting or correcting errors that are characterized by their arithmetic,
rather than Hamming, weights. We review some such codes in Sections 27.2 and 27.3.
Note that a minimum-weight binary signed-digit (BSD) representation of a k-bit
error magnitude has at most ⌈(k + 1)/2⌉nonzero digits and can always be written in
canonic BSD form without any consecutive nonzero digits. The canonic form of a BSD
number, which is unique, is intimately related to the notion of arithmetic error weight.
27.2 ARITHMETIC ERROR-DETECTING CODES
Arithmetic error-detecting codes:
1. Are characterized in terms of the arithmetic weights of detectable errors.
2. Allow us to perform arithmetic operations on coded operands directly.
The importance of the ﬁrst property was discussed at the end of Section 27.1. The
second property is crucial because it allows us to protect arithmetic computations against
circuit faults with much lower hardware redundancy (overhead) than full duplication or
triplication.

<<<JP584>>>
Arithmetic Error-Detecting Codes
571
In this section, we discuss two classes of arithmetic error-detecting codes: prod-
uct codes and residue codes. In both cases we will assume unsigned integer operands.
Extension of the concepts to signed integers and arbitrary ﬁxed-point numbers is straight-
forward. Codesforﬂoating-pointnumberstendtobemorecomplicatedandhavereceived
limited attention from arithmetic and fault-tolerance researchers.
Product codes
In a product code, also known as AN code, a number N is represented as the product
AN, where the check modulus A is a constant. Verifying the validity of an AN-coded
operand requires checking its divisibility by A. For odd A, all weight-1 arithmetic errors
(including all single-bit errors) are detected. Arithmetic errors of weight 2 and higher
may not be detectable. For example, the error 32 736 = 215 −25 is not detectable
with A = 3, 11, or 31, since the error magnitude is divisible by each of these check
moduli.
Encoding/decoding of numbers with product codes requires multiplication/division
by A. We will see shortly that performing arithmetic operations with product-coded
operands also requires multiplication and division by A. Thus, for these codes to be
practically viable, multiplication and division by the check modulus A should be simple.
We are thus led to the class of low-cost product codes with check moduli of the form
A = 2a −1.
Multiplication by A = 2a −1 is simple because it requires a shift and a subtract. In
particular, if the computation is performed a bits at a time (i.e., digit-serially in radix
2a), then one needs only an a-bit adder, an a-bit register to store the previous radix-2a
digit, and a ﬂip-ﬂop for storing the carry. Division by A = 2a −1 is similarly simple
if done a bits at a time. Given y = (2a −1)x, we ﬁnd x by computing 2ax −y. The
ﬁrst term in this expression is unknown, but we know that it ends in a zeros. This is all
that we need to compute the least-signiﬁcant a bits of x based on the knowledge of y.
These computed bits of x form the next a bits of 2ax, allowing us to ﬁnd the next a bits
of x, etc.
Since A = 2a −1 is odd, low-cost product codes can detect any weight-1 arithmetic
error. Some weight-2 and higher-weight errors may go undetected, but the fraction of
such errors becomes smaller with an increase in A. Unidirectional errors, in which all
erroneous bits are 0-to-1 or 1-to-0 inversions (but not both), form an important class of
errors in digital circuit implementations. For unidirectional errors, the error magnitude
is the sum of several powers of 2 with the same signs.
THEOREM 27.1 Any unidirectional error with arithmetic weight not exceeding
a −1 is detectable by a low-cost product code that uses the check modulus
A = 2a −1.
For example, the low-cost product code with A = 15 can detect any weight-2 or weight-
3 unidirectional arithmetic error in addition to all weight-1 errors. The following are
examples of weight-2 and weight-3 unidirectional errors that are detectable because the

<<<JP585>>>
572
Chapter 27 Fault-Tolerant Arithmetic
resulting error magnitude is not a multiple of 15:
8 + 4 = 12
128 + 4 = 132
16 + 4 + 2 = 22
256 + 16 + 2 = 274
Product codes are examples of nonseparate, or nonseparable, codes in which the original
data and the redundant information for checking are intermixed. In other words, the
original number N is not immediately apparent from inspecting its encoded version AN
but must be obtained through decoding (in this case, division by the check modulus A).
Arithmetic operations on product-coded operands are quite simple. Addition or
subtraction is done directly, since
Ax ± Ay = A(x ± y)
Direct multiplication results in
Aa × Ax = A2ax
So the result must be corrected through division by A. For division, if z = qd + s, with
q being the quotient and s the remainder, we have
Az = q(Ad) + As
So, direct division yields the quotient q along with the remainder As. The remainder
is thus obtained in encoded form, but the resulting quotient q must be encoded via
multiplication by A. Because q is obtained in nonredundant form, an error occurring in
its computation will go undetected. To keep the data protected against errors in the course
of the division process, one can premultiply the dividend Az by A and then divide A2z
by Ad as usual. The problem with this approach is that the division leads to a quotient
q* and remainder s* satisfying
A2z = q∗(Ad) + s∗
which may be different from the expected resultsAq and A2s (the latter needing correction
through division by A). Since q∗can be larger than Aq by up to A −1 units, the quotient
and remainder obtained from normal division may need correction. However, this again
raises the possibility of undetected errors in the handling of the unprotected value q∗,
which is not necessarily a multiple of A.
A possible solution to the preceding problem, when one is doing the division a
bits at a time for A = 2a −1, is to adjust the last radix-2a digit of q∗in such a way
that the adjusted quotient q∗∗becomes a multiple of A. This can be done rather easily
by keeping a modulo-A checksum of the previous quotient digits. One can prove that
suitably choosing the last radix-2a digit of q∗∗in [−2a + 2, 1] is sufﬁcient to correct the
problem. A subtraction is then needed to convert q∗∗to standard binary representation.
Details can be found elsewhere [Aviz73].

<<<JP586>>>
Arithmetic Error-Detecting Codes
573
Square-rooting leads to a problem similar to that encountered in division. Suppose
that we multiply the radicand Az by A and then use a standard square-rooting algorithm
to compute
⌊

A2x⌋= ⌊A√x⌋
Since the preceding result is in general different from the correct result A⌊√x⌋, there
is a need for correction. Again, the computed value ⌊A√x⌋can exceed the correct root
A⌊√x⌋by up to A −1 units. So, the same correction procedure suggested for division is
applicable here as well.
Residue codes
In a residue code, an operand N is represented by a pair of numbers (N, C(N)), where
C(N) = N mod A is the check part. The check modulus A is a constant. Residue codes
are examples of separate or separable codes in which the data and check parts are not
intermixed, thus making decoding trivial. Encoding a number N requires the computa-
tion of C(N) = N mod A, which is attached to N to form its encoded representation
(N, C(N)).
As in the case of product codes, we can deﬁne the class of low-cost residue codes,
with A = 2a −1, for which the encoding computation N mod A is simple: it requires
that a-bit segments of N be added modulo 2a −1 (using an a-bit adder with end-around
carry). This can be done digit-serially by using a single adder or in parallel by using a
binary tree of a-bit 1’s-complement adders.
Arithmetic operations on residue-coded operands are quite simple, especially if a
low-cost check modulus A = 2a −1 is used. Addition or subtraction is done by operating
on the data parts and check parts separately. That is
(x, C(x)) ± (y, C(y)) = (x ± y, (C(x) ± C(y)) mod A)
Hence, as shown in Fig. 27.4, an arithmetic unit for residue-coded operands has a main
adder for adding/subtracting the data parts and a small modulo-A adder to add/subtract
the residue checks. To detect faults within the arithmetic unit, the output of this small
    Main 
arithmetic
processor
   Check 
processor
x
y
C(x)
C(y)
z
Compare
mod
C(z)
Error
indicator
A
Figure 27.4 Arithmetic processor with residue checking.

<<<JP587>>>
574
Chapter 27 Fault-Tolerant Arithmetic
modular adder (check processor) is compared with the residue of the output from the
main adder.
Multiplication of residue-coded operands is equally simple, since
(a, C(a)) × (x, C(x)) = (a × x, (C(a) × C(x)) mod A)
So, again, the structure shown in Fig. 27.4 is applicable. This method of checking
the multiplication operation is essentially what we do when we verify the correctness of
our pencil-and-paper multiplication result by casting out nines.
Just as in residue number system (RNS) arithmetic, division and square-rooting are
complicated with residue-coded operands. For these operations, the small residue check
processor cannot operate independently from the main processor and must interact with
it to compute the check part of the result. Details are beyond the scope of this chapter.
As in product codes, choosing any odd value for A guarantees the detection of all
weight-1 arithmetic errors with residue codes. However, residue codes are less capable
than product codes for detecting multiple unidirectional errors. For example, we saw
earlier that the 15N code can detect all weight-2 and weight-3 unidirectional arithmetic
errors. The residue code with A = 15 cannot detect the weight-2 error resulting from
0-to-1 inversion of the least-signiﬁcant bit of the data as well as the least-signiﬁcant bit
of the residue. This error goes undetected because it adds 1 to the data as well as to the
residue, making the result a valid codeword.
To correct the preceding problem, inverse residue codes have been proposed for
which the check part represents A −(N mod A) rather than N mod A. In the special
case of A = 2a −1, the check bits constitute the bitwise complement of N mod A.
Unidirectional errors now affect the data and check parts in opposite directions, mak-
ing their detection more likely. By noting that attachment of the a-bit inverse residue
C′(N) = A −(N mod A) to the least-signiﬁcant end of a k-bit number N makes the
resulting (k + a)-bit number a multiple of A = 2a −1, the following result is easily
proven.
THEOREM 27.2 Any unidirectional error with arithmetic weight not exceeding
a−1 is detectable by a low-cost inverse residue code that uses the check modulus
A = 2a −1.
The added cost or overhead of an error-detecting code has two components:
The increased word width for coded operands adds to the cost of registers, memory,
and data links.
Checked arithmetic or wider operands make the ALU more complex.
With respect to the ﬁrst component of cost, product, residue, and inverse residue codes
are similar. For example, the low-cost versions of these codes with the check modulus
A = 2a −1 all require a additional bits to represent the coded operands. With regard to
arithmetic, residue and inverse residue codes are simpler than product codes for addition
and multiplication and more complex for division.
It is interesting to note that the residue-class codes are the only possible separable
codes for checking an adder [Pete58]. Also, it has been proven that bitwise logical

<<<JP588>>>
Arithmetic Error-Correcting Codes
575
operations such as AND, OR, and XOR cannot be checked by any coding scheme with
less than 100% redundancy; that is, the best we can do for error detection in logical
operations is duplication and comparison [Pete59], as in Fig. 27.2a.
27.3 ARITHMETIC ERROR-CORRECTING CODES
We illustrate the main ideas relating to arithmetic error-correcting codes by way of
examples from the class of biresidue codes. A biresidue code represents a number N as
the triple (N, C(N), D(N)), where the check components C(N) = N mod A and D(N) =
N mod B are residues with respect to the check moduli A and B. If the original number
requires k bits for its binary representation, its biresidue-coded representation would
need k + ⌈log2A⌉+ ⌈log2B⌉bits.
Encoding for the class of biresidue codes is similar to that of single-residue codes,
except that two residues must be computed. Addition and multiplication of biresidue-
coded operands can be performed by an arithmetic processor similar to that shown in
Fig. 27.4, but with two check processors. Since the two residues can be computed and
checked in parallel, no speed is lost.
Consider errors that affect the number N or only one of the residues, say C(N). Such
errors can be corrected as follows:
Error in C(N). In this case, C(N) will fail the residue check, while D(N) passes its
check; C(N) can then be corrected by recomputing N mod A.
Error in N. Unless the error magnitude happens to be a multiple of A and/or B (thus
being either totally undetectable or else indistinguishable from a residue error), both
residue checks will fail, thus pointing to N as the erroneous component. To correct
such errors, the differences between Nwrong mod A (Nwrong mod B) and C(N) (D(N))
must be noted. The two differences, [(Nwrong mod A) −C(N)] mod A and [(Nwrong
mod B) −D(N)] mod B, constitute an error syndrome. The error is then correctable
if the syndromes for different errors are distinct.
Consider, as an example, a biresidue code with the low-cost check moduli A = 7 and
B = 15. Table 27.1 shows that any weight-1 arithmetic error E with |E| ≤2048 leads
to a unique error syndrome, thus allowing us to correct it by subtracting the associated
error value from Nwrong. For |E| ≥4096, the syndromes assume the same values as for
E/4096. Hence, weight-1 error correction is guaranteed only for a 12-bit data part. Since
the two residues require a total of 7 bits for their representations, the redundancy for this
biresidue code is 7/12 ≈58%.
A product code with the check modulus A × B = 7 × 15 = 105 would similarly
allow us to correct weight-1 errors via checking the divisibility of the codeword by 7
and 15 and noting the remainders. This is much less efﬁcient, however, since the total
word width must be limited to 12 bits for full error coverage. The largest representable
number is thus 4095/105 = 39. This is equivalent to about 5.3 bits of data, leading to a
redundancy of 127%.
In general, a biresidue code with relatively prime low-cost check moduli A = 2a −1
and B = 2b −1 can support a data part of ab bits for weight-1 error correction with

<<<JP589>>>
576
Chapter 27 Fault-Tolerant Arithmetic
Table 27.1 Error syndromes for weight-1 arithmetic errors in
the (7, 15) biresidue code.
Error syndrome
Error syndrome
Positive
Negative
error
Mod 7
Mod 15
error
Mod 7
Mod 15
1
1
1
−1
6
14
2
2
2
−2
5
13
4
4
4
−4
3
11
8
1
8
−8
6
7
16
2
1
−16
5
14
32
4
2
−32
3
13
64
1
4
−64
6
11
128
2
8
−128
5
7
256
4
1
−256
3
14
512
1
2
−512
6
13
1024
2
4
−1024
5
11
2048
4
8
−2048
3
7
4096
1
1
−4096
6
14
8192
2
2
−8192
5
13
16384
4
4
−16384
3
11
32768
1
8
−32768
6
7
a representational redundancy of (a + b)/(ab) = 1/a + 1/b. Thus, with a choice of
suitably large values for a and b, the redundancy can be kept low.
Based on our discussion of arithmetic error-detecting and error-correcting codes,
we conclude that such codes are effective not only for protecting against fault-induced
errors during arithmetic computations but also for dealing with storage and transmission
errors. Using a single code throughout the system obviates the need for frequent encod-
ing and decoding and minimizes the chance of data corruption during the handling of
unencoded data.
27.4 SELF-CHECKING FUNCTION UNITS
Aself-checkingfunctionunitcanbedesignedwithorwithoutencodedinputsandoutputs.
For example, if in Fig. 27.4, x mod A and y mod A are computed internally, as opposed
to being supplied as inputs, a self-checking arithmetic unit with unencoded input/output
is obtained.
The theory of self-checking logic design is quite well developed and can be used to
implement highly reliable, or at least fail-safe, arithmetic units. The idea is to design
the required logic circuits in such a way that any fault, from a prescribed set of faults
that we wish to protect against, either does not affect the correctness of the outputs
(is masked) or else leads to a non-codeword output (is made observable). In the latter
case, the invalid result is either detected immediately by a code checker attached to the
unit’s output or else is propagated downstream by the next self-checking module that

<<<JP590>>>
Self-Checking Function Units
577
is required to produce a non-codeword output for any non-codeword input it receives
(somewhat similar to computation with not-a-numbers in ﬂoating-point arithmetic).
An important issue in the design of such self-checking units is the ability to build
self-checking code checkers that are guaranteed not to validate a non-codeword despite
internal faults. For example, a self-checking checker for an inverse residue code (N,
C′(N)) might be designed as follows. First, N mod A is computed. If the input is a valid
codeword, this computed value must be the bitwise complement of C′(N). We can view
the process of verifying that xb−1 · · · x1x0 is the bitwise complement of yb−1 · · · y1y0
as that of ensuring that the signal pairs (xi, yi) are all (1, 0) or (0, 1). This amounts to
computing the logical AND of a set of Boolean values that are represented using the
following 2-bit encoding:
1
encoded as
(1, 0) or (0, 1)
0
encoded as
(0, 0) or (1, 1)
Note that the code checker produces two outputs that carry (1, 0) or (0, 1) if the input
is correct and (0, 0) or (1, 1) if it is not. It is an easy matter to design the required
AND circuit such that no single gate or line fault leads to a (1, 0) or (0, 1) output for a
non-codeword input. For example, one can build an AND tree from the two-input AND
circuit shown in Fig. 27.5. Note that any code checker that has only one output line
cannot be self-checking, since a single stuck-at fault on its output line can produce a
misleading result.
Fault detection can also be achieved by result checking. This is similar to what, in
the ﬁeld of software fault tolerance, is known as acceptance testing. An acceptance test
is a (hopefully simple) veriﬁcation process. For example, the correct functioning of a
square-rooter can be veriﬁed by squaring each obtained root and comparing the result to
the original radicand. If we assume that any error in the squaring process is independent
from, and thus unlikely to compensate for, errors in the square-rooting process, a result
that passes the veriﬁcation test is correct with very high probability.
Acceptance tests do not have to be perfect. A test with imperfect coverage (e.g.,
comparing residues) may not detect each fault immediately after it occurs, but over time
will signal a malfunctioning unit with high probability. On the other hand, if we assume
that faults are permanent and occur very rarely, then periodic, as opposed to concurrent
or on-line, veriﬁcation might be adequate for fault detection. Such periodic checks might
Figure 27.5
Two-input AND
circuit,with 2-bit
inputs (xi, yi) and
(xj, yj),for use in a
self-checking code
checker.
x
y i
i
x
y j
j

<<<JP591>>>
578
Chapter 27 Fault-Tolerant Arithmetic
k
k
k
ALU
Error
Ordinary ALU
(a) Parity prediction
k
ALU
k + h 
P/R
k + h 
k
R/P 
k
P/R
k + h
(b) Parity preservation
Parity-
encoded
inputs
Parity
predictor
Parity
generator
Parity-
encoded
output
Parity-
encoded
inputs
Parity-
encoded
output
Redundant parity-preserving ALU 
Figure 27.6 Self-checking adders with parity-encoded inputs and output.
involve computing with several random operands and verifying the correctness of the
results to make it less likely for compensating errors to render the fault undetectable
[Blum96].
Given that parity codes are quite simple and possess low redundancy, a particularly
attractive self-checking design strategy might be based on parity-encoded inputs and
outputs. The fault detection coverage of the resulting scheme is typically quite low, but
taking the previously discussed longer term perspective of detecting faulty components
in a reasonable time frame, this low redundancy method might be deemed cost-effective.
The main design challenge with a parity-based scheme is that parity codes are not closed
under arithmetic operations. So, we must devise strategies for predicting the output
parity, in a manner that faults in the prediction circuits do not lead to undetected errors.
Figure 27.6a shows how the method might be applied to the design of a two-operand
adder [Nico93]. The parity predictor must be completely independent of the ALU for
the scheme of Fig. 27.6a to be effective.
An alternative design strategy is depicted in Fig. 27.6b. The idea is to preserve the
even parity of the data in every stage of computation, eventually leading to even-parity
outputs. Thus, we see in Fig. 27.6b that the parity-encoded inputs are ﬁrst converted
to BSD numbers of even parity. A parity-preserving BSD adder then computes the
even-parity redundant sum of the two numbers. Finally, the latter sum is converted to
a parity-encoded conventional output. The key idea that enables the foregoing scheme
is our ability to encode two adjacent BSD digits into an even-parity 4-bit code and
designing the BSD adder to be parity-preserving [Thor97]. The code used might be
based on the signed-magnitude encoding of BSD, with both +0 and −0 allowed for the
digit value 0. It is this ﬂexibility of having even-parity and odd-parity codes for 0 that
makes the scheme possible. Implementation details, including a minor adjustment for
handling 2’s-complement operands, can be found elsewhere [Parh02].
27.5 ALGORITHM-BASED FAULT TOLERANCE
So far, our focus has been on methods that allow us to detect and/or correct errors at the
level of individual basic arithmetic operations such as addition and multiplication. An
alternative strategy is to accept that arithmetic operations may yield incorrect results and
build the mechanisms for detecting or correcting errors at the data structure or application
level.

<<<JP592>>>
Algorithm-Based Fault Tolerance
579
Figure 27.7 A 3 × 3
matrix M with its
modulo-8 row,
column,and full
checksum matrices
Mr, Mc,and Mf .
M =


2
1
6
5
3
4
3
2
7


Mr =


2
1
6
1
5
3
4
4
3
2
7
4


Mc =


2
1
6
5
3
4
3
2
7
2
6
1


Mf =


2
1
6
1
5
3
4
4
3
2
7
4
2
6
1
1


As an example of this approach, consider the multiplication of matrices X and Y
yielding the result matrix P. The checksum of a list of numbers (a vector) is simply the
algebraic sum of all the numbers modulo some check constant A. For any m × n matrix
M , we deﬁne the row-checksum matrix Mr as an m×(n+1) matrix that is identical to M
in its columns 0 through n −1 and has as its nth column the respective row checksums.
Similarly, the column-checksum matrix Mc is an (m + 1) × n matrix that is identical to
M in its rows 0 through m −1 and has as its mth row the respective column checksums.
The full-checksum matrix Mf is deﬁned as the (m + 1) × (n + 1) matrix (Mr)c: that is,
the column-checksum matrix of the row-checksum matrix of M . Figure 27.7 shows a
3 × 3 matrix with its row, column, and full checksum matrices, where the checksums
are computed modulo A = 8.
The following result allows us to detect and/or correct computation errors in matrix
multiplication.
THEOREM 27.3 For matrices X , Y, and P satisfying P = X × Y, we have
Pf = Xc × Yr.
According to Theorem 27.3, we can perform standard matrix multiplication on the
encoded matrices Xc and Yr and then compare the values in the last column and row
of the product matrix to checksums that are computed based on the remaining elements
to detect any error that may have occurred. If matrix elements are ﬂoating-point num-
bers, the equalities will hold approximately, leading to difﬁculties in selecting a suitable
threshold for considering values equal. Some methods to resolve this problem are given
in [Dutt96].
The full-checksum matrix Mf is an example of a robust data structure for which the
following properties of error detection and correction hold.
THEOREM 27.4 In a full-checksum matrix, any single erroneous element can be
corrected and any three erroneous elements can be detected.
Thus, for highly localized fault-induced errors (e.g., arising from a very brief transient
fault in a hardware multiplier affecting no more than three elements of the product
matrix), the preceding scheme allows for error correction or detection. Detection of more
extensive errors, though not guaranteed, is quite likely; it would indeed be improbable
for several errors to be compensatory in such a way that they escape detection by any of
the checksums.

<<<JP593>>>
580
Chapter 27 Fault-Tolerant Arithmetic
Designing such robust data structures with given capabilities of error detection and/or
correction, such that they also lend themselves to direct manipulation by suitably modi-
ﬁed arithmetic algorithms, is still an art. However, steady progress is being made in this
area. For a review of algorithm-based fault tolerance methods, see [Vija97].
27.6 FAULT-TOLERANT RNS ARITHMETIC
Redundant encodings can be used with any number representation scheme to detect or
correct errors. Residue number systems, in particular, allow very elegant and effec-
tive error detection and correction schemes through the use of redundant residues
corresponding to extra moduli.
Suppose we choose the set of moduli in an RNS in such a way that one residue is
redundant (i.e., if we remove any one modulus, the remaining moduli are adequate for
the desired dynamic range). Then, any error that is conﬁned to a single residue will be
detectable, since such an error would make the affected residue inconsistent with the
others. If this scheme is to work, the redundant modulus obviously must be the largest
one (say m). The error detection scheme is thus as follows. Use all other residues to
compute the residue of the number mod m. This is done by a process known as base
extension for which many algorithms exist. Then compare the computed mod-m residue
with the mod-m residue in the number representation to detect a possible error.
The beauty of this method is that arithmetic algorithms are totally unaffected; error
detection is made possible by simply extending the dynamic range of the RNS. The
base extension operation needed for error detection is frequently provided in an RNS
processor for other reasons—for example, as a building block for synthesizing different
RNS operations. In such a case, no additional hardware, beyond that required to handle
the extra residue, is needed for error detection. In fact, it is possible to disable the error-
checking capabilities and use the extended dynamic range offered by all the moduli when
performing less critical computations.
Providing multiple redundant residues can lead to the detection of more errors and/or
correction of certain error classes [Etze80] in a manner similar to the error-correction
property of biresidue and multiresidue codes of Section 27.3. Again, the only new
elements that are needed are the checking algorithms and the corresponding hardware
structures. The arithmetic algorithms do not change.
As an example, consider adding the two redundant moduli 13 and 11 to the RNS with
the four moduli 8, 7, 5, 3 (dynamic range = 840). In the resulting 6-modulus redundant
RNS, the number 25 is represented as (12, 3, 1, 4, 0, 1), where the residues are listed
in order from the largest to the smallest modulus. Now suppose that the mod-7 residue
is corrupted and the number becomes (12, 3, 1, 6, 0, 1). Using base extension, we
compute the two redundant residues from the other four residues; that is, we transform
(−, −, 1, 6, 0, 1) to (5, 1, 1, 6, 0, 1). The difference between the ﬁrst two components
of the original corrupted number and the reconstructed number is (+7, +2), which is
the error syndrome that points to a particular residue in need of correction. We see
that the error correction scheme here is quite similar to that shown in Table 27.1 for
a biresidue code.

<<<JP594>>>
Problems
581
PROBLEMS
27.1 Voting on integer results
One way to design the voter shown in Fig. 27.2 is to use a three-input majority
circuit (identical in function to the carry-out of a full adder) and do serial bitwise
voting on the outputs of the three ALUs. Assume that the ALU outputs are 8-bit
unsigned integers.
a. Show that serial bitwise voting produces the correct voting result, given at
most one faulty ALU.
b. What would the output of the bit-serial voter be if its inputs are 15, 19, and 38?
c. Present the design of a bit-serial voter that can indicate the absence of majority
agreement should a situation similar to the one in part b arise.
27.2 Approximate voting
Suppose that the three-input voter shown in Fig. 27.2 is to interpret its 32-bit
unsigned inputs as fractional values that may contain small computational errors
(possibly a different amount for each input).
a. Provide a suitable deﬁnition of majority agreement in this case.
b. Can a bit-serial voter, producing its output on the ﬂy, be designed in
accordance with the deﬁnition of part a?
c. Design a bit-serial median voter that outputs the middle value among its three
imprecise inputs.
d. Under what conditions is the output of a median voter the same as that of a
majority voter?
27.3 Design of comparators
For the two-channel redundant arrangement of Fig. 27.2, discuss the design
of bit-serial comparators for integer (exact) and fractional (approximate)
results.
27.4 Arithmetic weight
a. Prove that any minimal-weight BSD representation of a k-bit binary number
has at most ⌈(k + 1)/2⌉nonzero digits and can always be written in canonic
BSD form without any consecutive nonzero digits.
b. Show that the arithmetic weight of a binary number x is the same as the
Hamming distance between the binary representations of x and 3x.
27.5 Low-cost product codes
a. Prove Theorem 27.1 characterizing the unidirectional error-detecting power
of low-cost product codes.
b. What fraction of random double-bit errors are detectable by a low-cost
product code with A = 2a −1?
c. Can moduli of the form A = 2a + 1 be included in low-cost product
codes?

<<<JP595>>>
582
Chapter 27 Fault-Tolerant Arithmetic
27.6 Low-cost residue codes
a. Prove Theorem 27.2, which characterizes the unidirectional error-detecting
power of low-cost inverse residue codes.
b. What fraction of random double-bit errors is detectable by a low-cost residue
code with the check modulus A = 2a −1?
c. Repeat part b for low-cost inverse residue codes.
d. Show how the computation of the modulo-(2a −1) residue of a number can
be speeded up by using a tree of carry-save adders rather than a tree of a-bit
adders with end-around carries.
e. Apply your method of part d to the computation of the mod-15 residue of a
32-bit number and compare the result with respect to speed and cost to the
alternative approach.
f. Suggest an efﬁcient method for computing the modulo-17 residue of a 32-bit
number and generalize it to the computation of mod-(2a + 1) residues.
27.7 Division with product-coded operands
Show that if q and s are the quotient and remainder in dividing z by d (i.e.,
z = qd + s) and A = 2a −1, then in dividing A2z by Ad, the obtained quotient
q** can always be made equal to Aq by choosing the last radix-2a digit of q**
in [−2a + 2, 1].
27.8 Low-cost biresidue codes
a. Characterizetheerrorcorrectioncapabilityofa(7, 3)low-costbiresiduecode.
b. If only error detection is required, how much more effective is the (7, 3)
biresidue code compared with a single-residue code with the check modu-
lus 7? Would you say that the additional redundancy due to the second check
modulus 3 is worth its cost?
c. Propose a low-cost biresidue code that is capable of correcting all weight-1
arithmetic errors in data elements that are 32 bits wide.
27.9 Self-checking checkers
a. Verify that the AND circuit of Fig. 27.5 is an optimal implementation of the
desired functionality. Note that the speciﬁcation of the design has “coupled
don’t-cares”: that is, one output of the AND circuit can be 0 or 1 provided
that the other one is (not) equal to it.
b. Verify that the AND circuit of Fig. 27.5 is self-testing in the sense that both
output combinations (0, 1) and (1, 0) appear during normal operation when
there is no input error. Note that if a self-checking checker produces only the
output (1, 0), say, during normal operation, some output stuck-at faults may
go undetected.
c. Use the AND circuit of Fig. 27.5 as a building block to construct a self-
checking circuit to check the validity of a 10-bit integer that has been encoded
in the low-cost product code with the check modulus A = 3.

<<<JP596>>>
Problems
583
d. Design the OR-circuit and NOT-circuit (inverter) counterparts to the AND
circuit of Fig. 27.5. Discuss whether these additional circuits could be useful
in practice.
27.10 Self-checking function unit
Present the complete design a self-checking additive multiply module using the
low-cost product code with A = 3. The two additive and two multiplicative
inputs, originally 4-bit unsigned numbers, are presented in 6-bit encoded form,
and the encoded output is 10 bits wide. Analyze the speed and cost overhead of
your self-checking design.
27.11 Self-checking arithmetic circuits
Consider the design of self-checking arithmetic circuits using two-rail encoding
of the signals: 0 represented as (0, 1) and 1 as (1, 0), with (0, 0) and (1, 1)
signaling an error.
a. Design a two-rail self-checking full-adder cell. Hint: Think of how two-rail
AND, OR, and NOT elements might be built.
b. Using the design of an array multiplier as an example, compare the two-
rail self-checking design approach to circuit duplication with comparison.
Discuss.
27.12 Algorithm-based fault tolerance
a. Verify that the product of the matrices Mc and Mr of Fig. 27.7 yields the
full checksum matrix (M 2)f if the additions corresponding to the checksum
elements are performed modulo 8.
b. Prove Theorem 27.3 in general.
c. Construct an example showing that the presence of four erroneous elements in
the full checksum matrix Mf can go undetected. Then, prove Theorem 27.4.
27.13 Algorithm-based fault tolerance
Formulate an algorithm-based fault tolerance scheme for multiplying a matrix
by a vector and discuss its error detection and correction characteristics.
27.14 Redundant RNS representations
For the redundant RNS example presented at the end of Section 27.6 (original
moduli 8, 7, 5, 3; redundant moduli 13, 11):
a. What is the redundancy with binary-encoded residues? How do you deﬁne
the redundancy?
b. Construct a syndrome table similar to Table 27.1 for single-residue error
correction.
c. Show that all double-residue errors are detectable.
d. Explain whether, and if so, how, one can detect double-residue errors and
correct single-residue errors at the same time.
