<<<JP622>>>
A
Appendix:
Past,Present,and Future
■■■
“Who controls the past controls the future; who controls the present controls the past.”
G E O R G E O R W E L L
■■■
I
n this appendix, we trace the history of computer arithmetic, from the earliest
digitalcomputerstothemodernmachinesthatpermeateourdailylives.Wepresent
a few turning points along this amazing chain of events, including the development
of early supercomputers,the role played by vector supercomputers (particularly,their
contributions to advances in pipelining), the arrival of digital signal processors, and
the distillation of all these advanced developments into the tiny processors that
power our desktop and laptop computers.We conclude with a discussion of current
trends,future outlook,and resources for further study of computer arithmetic.
A.1 Historical Perspective
A.2 Early High-Performance Computers
A.3 Deeply Pipelined Vector Machines
A.4 The DSP Revolution
A.5 Supercomputers on Our Laps
A.6 Trends,Outlook,and Resources
A.1 HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
The history of computer arithmetic is intertwined with that of digital computers. Much of
this history can be traced through a collection of key papers [Swar90] in the ﬁeld, some
of which are not easily accessible in the original form. Certain ideas used in computer
609

<<<JP623>>>
610
Appendix: Past, Present, and Future
arithmetic have their origins in the age of mechanical calculators. In fact Charles Babbage
is said to have been aware of ideas such as carry-skip addition, carry-save addition, and
restoring division [Omon94].
In the 1940s, machine arithmetic was a crucial element in efforts to prove the feasi-
bility of computing with stored-program electronic devices. Hardware mechanisms for
addition, use of complement representation to facilitate subtraction, and implementation
of multiplication and division through shift/add algorithms were developed and ﬁne-
tuned early on. A seminal report in the initial development of stored-program electronic
digital computers by A. W. Burkes, H. H. Goldstein, and J. von Neumann [Burk46]
contained interesting ideas on arithmetic algorithms and their hardware realizations,
including choice of number representation radix (binary won over decimal), distribution
of carry-propagation chains, fast multiplication via carry-save addition, and restoring
division. The state of computer arithmetic circa 1950 is evident from an overview paper
by R. F. Shaw [Shaw50].
Early stored-program digital computers were primarily number-crunching machines
with limited storage and input/output (I/O) capabilities. Thus, the bulk of design effort
was necessarily expended on cost-effective realization of the instruction sequencing
and arithmetic/logic functions. The 1950s brought about many important advances in
computer arithmetic. With the questions of feasibility already settled, the focus now
shifted to algorithmic speedup methods and cost-effective hardware realizations. By the
end of the decade, virtually all important fast adder designs had already been published
or were in the ﬁnal phases of development. Similarly, the notions of residue arithmetic,
high-radix multiplication, SRT (named for Sweeny, Robertson, and Tocher) division,
and coordinate rotation digital computer (CORDIC) algorithms were all proposed and
implemented in the 1950s. An overview paper by O. L. MacSorley [MacS61] contains
a snapshot of the state of the art circa 1960.
Computer arithmetic advances continued in the 1960s with the introduction of tree
multipliers, array multipliers, high-radix dividers, convergence division, redundant
signed-digit arithmetic, and implementation of ﬂoating-point (FLP) arithmetic opera-
tions in hardware or ﬁrmware (in microprogram). A by-product of microprogrammed
control, which became prevalent for ﬂexibility and economy of hardware implemen-
tations, was that greater arithmetic functionality could be incorporated into even the
smallest processors by means of using standardized word widths across a whole range
of machines with different computing powers.
Someofthemostinnovativeideasoriginatedfromthedesignofearlysupercomputers
in the 1960s, when the demand for high performance, along with the still high cost
of hardware, led designers to novel solutions that made high-speed machine arithmetic
quite cost-effective. Striking examples of design ingenuity can be found in the arithmetic
units of the IBM System/360 Model 91 [Ande67] and CDC 6600 [Thor70]. Other digital
systems of the pre-integrated-circuit era no doubt contained interesting design ideas, but
the IBM and CDC systems were extensively documented in the open technical literature,
making them excellent case studies. It is quite regrettable that today’s designs are not
described in the technical literature with the same degree of openness and detail. We
brieﬂy discuss the design of the ﬂoating-point execution unit of IBM System/360 Model
91 in Section A.2. From this case study, we can deduce that the state of computer
arithmetic was quite advanced in the mid-1960s.

<<<JP624>>>
Historical Perspective
611
As applications of computers expanded in scope and signiﬁcance, faster algorithms
and more compact implementations were sought to keep up with the demand for higher
performance and lower cost. The 1970s are distinguished by the advent of micropro-
cessors and vector supercomputers. Early large-scale integrated circuit chips were quite
limited in the number of transistors or logic gates they could accommodate; thus micro-
programmed implementation was a natural choice for single-chip processors, which were
not yet expected to offer high performance. At the high end of performance spectrum,
pipelining methods were perfected to allow the throughput of arithmetic units to keep
up with computational demand in vector supercomputers. In Section A.3, we study the
design of one such vector supercomputer, the Cray X-MP/Model 24.
Widespread application of very large-scale integration (VLSI) circuits in the 1980s
triggered a reconsideration of virtually all arithmetic designs in light of interconnection
cost and pin limitations. For example, carry-lookahead adders, which appeared to be
ill-suited to VLSI implementation, were shown to be efﬁciently realizable after suitable
modiﬁcations. Similar ideas were applied to more efﬁcient VLSI implementation of tree
and array multipliers. Additionally, bit-serial and on-line arithmetic were advanced to
deal with severe pin limitations in VLSI packages. This phase of the development of
computer arithmetic was also guided by the demand to perform arithmetic-intensive sig-
nal processing functions using low-cost and/or high-performance embedded hardware.
Examples of ﬁxed- and ﬂoating-point processors for digital signal processing appli-
cations are provided in Section A.4. Development of the IEEE (Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers) 754 binary ﬂoating-point standard, issued in 1985, was also
noteworthy in this decade.
During the 1990s, computer arithmetic continued to mature. Despite the lack of
any breakthrough design concept, both theoretical development and reﬁnement of the
designs continued at a rapid pace. The increasing demand for performance resulted in
ﬁne-tuning of arithmetic algorithms to take advantage of particular features of imple-
mentation technologies. Thus, we witnessed the emergence of a wide array of hybrid
designs that combined features from one or more pure designs into a highly optimized
arithmetic structure. Other trends included increasing use of table lookup and tight inte-
gration of arithmetic unit and other parts of the processor for maximum performance.
As clock speeds reached and surpassed 100, 200, 300, 400, and 500 MHz in rapid
succession, everything had to be (deeply) pipelined to ensure the smooth ﬂow of data
through the system. An example of such methods in the design of Intel’s Pentium Pro
(P6) microprocessor is discussed in Section A.5.
The 2000s can be characterized by three parallel, and interacting, trends shaping the
research on computer arithmetic: (1) the availability of many millions of transistors on
a single microchip, at essentially zero material cost, but with seemingly insurmountable
design, veriﬁcation, and manufacturing challenges; (2) the extreme energy requirements,
and the attendant heat dissipation, of the said transistors, if a signiﬁcant fraction of them
were to be used concurrently to achieve high performance; (3) the shift of focus in
arithmetic-intensive applications, from the domain of scientiﬁc computations on expen-
sive mainframes and supercomputers to media processing and geometric rendering on
desktops, and by the middle of the decade, on pocket-size personal electronic devices.
These trends intensiﬁed the already severe arithmetic design challenges. By the end
of the decade, desktop and laptop computers were offering hundreds of times greater

<<<JP625>>>
612
Appendix: Past, Present, and Future
computational power than the early supercomputers of Section A.2. The challenges
were met through engineering innovations, including greater focus on reconﬁgurable
arithmetic to counteract the rising development and manufacturing complexities. Work
leading to the approval of the revised IEEE ﬂoating-point standard (IEEE 754-2008)
constituted one of the highlights of the decade.
So, what can we expect for computer arithmetic in its eighth decade, during the
2010s? We will tackle this question in Section A.6, because our discussion of it will
be enriched by insights gained from the material in Sections A.2-A.5. We forewarn the
reader, however, that there will be no slowdown in the pace of innovation, and certainly
no retirement party!
A.2 EARLY HIGH-PERFORMANCE COMPUTERS
In this section, we review key design features of the ﬂoating-point arithmetic hardware
of IBM System/360 Model 91, a supercomputer of the mid-1960s, which brought forth
numerous architectural innovations. The technical paper on which this description is
based [Ande67] is considered one of the key publications in the history of computer
arithmetic. For an insightful retrospective on the Model 91, see [Flyn98]. The CDC
6600 [Thor70] is another 1960s vintage supercomputer worth studying. We leave this
task to the reader (see Problem A.4).
The IBM System/360 Model 91 had two concurrently operating ﬂoating-point exe-
cution units (Fig. A.1), each with a two-stage pipelined adder and a 12 × 56 pipelined
multiplier, to meet the ambitious design goal of executing one ﬂoating-point instruction
per 20-ns clock cycle on the average. The unit could handle 32-bit or 64-bit ﬂoating-point
numbers with sign, 7-bit excess-64 base-16 exponent, and 24-bit or 56-bit normalized
signiﬁcand in [1/16, 1). Floating-point operands were supplied to the execution units
from a number of buffers or registers. Within the execution units, a number of “reserva-
tion stations” (RS), each holding two operands, allowed effective utilization of hardware
by ensuring that the next set of operands always was available when an arithmetic circuit
was ready to accept it.
The Model 91 ﬂoating-point adder consisted of standard blocks such as exponent
adder, preshifter, postshifter, and exponent adjuster, in addition to a 56-bit fraction adder.
The fraction adder had a three-level carry-lookahead design with 4-bit groups and 8-bit
sections. Thus, there were two groups per section and seven sections in the adder. Many
clever design methods were used to speed up and simplify the adder. For example, the
adder was designed to produce both the true sum and its 2’s complement, one of which
was then selected as the adder’s output. This feature served to reduce the length of the
adder’s critical path; only the operand that was not preshifted could be complemented.
This could force the computation of y −x instead of the desired x −y, thus necessitating
output complementation. As a result of various optimization and speedup techniques, a
ﬂoating-add arithmetic operation could be executed in 2 clock cycles (or one add per
cycle per ﬂoating-point unit with pipelining).
The Model 91 ﬂoating-point multiplier could multiply a 56-bit multiplicand by a 12-
bit multiplier in one pass through its hardware tree of carry-save adders (CSAs), keeping

<<<JP626>>>
Early High-Performance Computers
613
Floating-
point
instruction
unit
RS1
RS2
RS3
RS1
RS2
Register bus
Buffer bus
Common bus
Instruction
buffers and 
controls
To storage
Adder
stage 1
Adder
stage 2
Result bus
Result
Result
Multiply
iteration
unit
Propagate
adder
From storage
To fixed-point unit
Add
unit
Mul/
Div
unit
Floating-point
execution unit 1
Floating
point
execution
unit 2
Registers
(4)
Buffers
(6)
Figure A.1 Overall structure of the IBM System/360 Model 91 ﬂoating-point execution unit.
the partial product in carry-save form, to be subsequently combined with the results from
other 12-bit segments of the multiplier. Radix-4 Booth’s recoding was used to form six
multiples of the multiplicand to be added (thus, actually 13 bits of the multiplier were
required in each step in view of the 1-bit overlap). The six multiples were reduced to
two in a three-level CSA tree. Another two CSA levels were used to combine these two
values with the shifted carry-save partial product from earlier steps. Pipelining allowed
12 multiplier bits to be processed in each clock cycle. The ﬂoating-point multiply took
6 clock cycles, or 120 ns, overall.
Floating-point division was performed by the Newton–Raphson convergence method
using the hardware multiplier and a small amount of extra logic. An initial table lookup
provided an approximate reciprocal of the divisor that led to 7 bits of convergence with
a 12-bit multiplier. Three more steps of such short multiplications (requiring a single
pass through the CSA tree) increased the convergence to 14, 23, and 28 bits. A ﬁnal
half-multiply, needing three passes through the CSA tree, completed the process. The
pair of multiplications was pipelined in each step, with the result that ﬂoating-point

<<<JP627>>>
614
Appendix: Past, Present, and Future
divide took only 18 clock cycles. Early versions of the Model 91 ﬂoating-point unit
sometimes yielded an incorrect least-signiﬁcant bit for the quotient. This problem, which
had been due to inadequate analysis of the division convergence process, was corrected
in subsequent versions.
A.3 DEEPLY PIPELINED VECTOR MACHINES
Modern supercomputers come in two varieties: vector multiprocessors consisting of a
small to moderate number of powerful vector processors, and parallel computers using
very large ensembles of simpler processors.
Small-scale parallel computers typically use off-the-shelf, high-performance micro-
processors as their basic building blocks, while some massively parallel computers are
based on very simple custom processors, perhaps with multiple processors on a single
microchip. Since we discuss arithmetic in a microprocessor in SectionA.5, and since we
have already covered an example of arithmetic in the simple bit-serial processors of the
CM-2 massively parallel computer (Section 24.3), here we focus on the design of the
Cray X-MP/Model 24 processor as an example of the former category [Robb89]. This
machine has been superseded by the Y-MP, C-90, and various other Cray supercom-
puters, but it offers a good example for discussing the principles of high-performance
vector processing, with the associated highly pipelined implementation of arithmetic
operations and pipeline chaining.
The Cray X-MP/Model 24 consists of two identical CPUs sharing a main memory
and an I/O subsystem. Most instructions can begin execution in a single 9.5-ns machine
cycle and are capable of producing results on every machine cycle, given suitably long
vector computations and appropriate data layout in memory to avoid memory bank
conﬂicts. Each CPU has an address section, a scalar section, and a vector section, each
with its own registers and functional units.
The address section is the simplest of the three sections. It uses an integer multi-
plier and an adder (four- and two-stage pipeline, respectively) for operating on, and
computing, 24-bit memory addresses.
The scalar section has functional units for addition (three-stage pipeline), weight/
parity/leading-zeros determination (three- or four-stage), shifting (two-stage), and
logical operations (one-stage). With very few exceptions, all arithmetic and logical
operations deal with 64-bit integer or ﬂoating-point operands. Floating-point numbers
have a sign bit, 15 exponent bits, and 48 signiﬁcand bits (including an explicit 1 after
the radix point).
The vector section is perhaps the most interesting and elaborate part of the processor,
and we focus on it in the remainder of this section. Figure A.2 is a block diagram of the
Cray X-MP’s vector section. There are eight sets of 64-element vector registers that are
used to supply operands to, and accept results from, the functional units. These allow
the required vectors or vector segments to be prefetched, and the vector results stored
back in memory, concurrently with arithmetic/logic operations on other vectors or vector
segments. In fact, intermediate computation results do not need to be stored in a register
before further processing. Amethod known as pipeline chaining allows the output of one

<<<JP628>>>
The DSP Revolution
615
V0
V7
V6
V5
V4
V3
V2
V1
  0
  1
  2
  3
  .
  .
  .
62
63
Vector
registers
To/from memory
Vector
integer
units
Logical 1
Shift
 Add
Logical 2
Weight/
Parity
Stages σ=  5
4
2
3
3
Floating-
point
units
Multiply
 Add
Reciprocal
Approx.
Stages σ = 14
7
6
To/from scalar unit
Vector length,
mask, & control
From
address
unit
Control
signals
Figure A.2 The vector section of one of the processors in the Cray X-MP/Model 24
supercomputer.
pipeline (e.g., multiplier) to be forwarded to another (say, adder) if a vector computation
such as (A[i] × B[i]) + C[i] is to be performed.
Vector computations need 3 clock cycles for their setup, which includes preparing
the appropriate functional units and establishing paths from/to source and destination
registers to them. At the end of a vector computation, 3 more clock cycles are needed
for shutdown before the results in the destination vector register can be used in other
operations. This type of pipelining overhead, which becomes insigniﬁcant when one
is dealing with long vectors, is the main reason for vector machines having a “break-
even” vector length (i.e., a length beyond which vector arithmetic is faster than scalar
arithmetic performed in a program loop).
Once a vector computation has been set up, a pair of elements enters the ﬁrst stage of
the pipeline on every clock cycle and the partial results for the preceding pairs move one
stage forward in the pipeline. FigureA.2 lists the number σ of pipeline stages for various
operations. The output of a σ-stage pipelined unit becomes available for chaining after
σ +5 clock cycles. Such a unit needs λ+σ +5 clock cycles to operate on a λ-element vec-
tor. However, the functional unit is freed for the next vector operation after λ+4 cycles.
A.4 THE DSP REVOLUTION
Many digital signal processing (DSP) applications are arithmetic-intensive and cost-
sensitive, thus requiring innovative solutions for cost-effective implementation.Adigital

<<<JP629>>>
616
Appendix: Past, Present, and Future
signal processor (also abbreviated as DSP), can be a special-purpose or a general-purpose
unit. Special-purpose DSPs have been designed in a variety of ways, using conventional
or unconventional (residue, logarithmic) number representations. It is impossible to
review all these approaches here [Sode86], [Jull94]. We thus focus on the design of
typical general-purpose DSP chips.
General-purpose DSPs are available as standard components from several microchip
manufacturers. They come in two varieties: ﬁxed point and ﬂoating point. Integer DSP
chips are simpler and thus both faster and less expensive. They are used whenever the
application deals with numerical values in limited and well-deﬁned ranges so that scaling
can be done with acceptable overhead (e.g., in simple voice processing). The payoff then
is faster processing or higher accuracy. When the range of numerical values is highly
variable or unpredictable, or the data rate is too high to allow the use of lengthy scaling
computations, built-in ﬂoating-point arithmetic capability becomes mandatory (e.g., in
multimedia workstations).
Motorola’s DSP56002 chip is a 24-bit ﬁxed-point DSP [ElSh96]. It deals with 24-bit
and 48-bit signed fractions and internally uses a 56-bit format consisting of 9 whole bits,
including the sign, and 47 fractional bits.As shown in Fig.A.3, there are four 24-bit input
registers that can also be used as two 48-bit registers. Similarly, the two 56-bit accu-
mulator registers can be viewed as four 24-bit and two 8-bit registers. Arithmetic/logic
Figure A.3 Block
diagram of the data
ALU in Motorola’s
DSP56002
(ﬁxed-point)
processor.
B Shifter/Limiter
X Bus
Y Bus
X1
X0
Y1
Y0
X
Y
24
24
24
24
47
A1
A0
B1
B0
A
B
A2
B2
56
56
Shifter
56
A Shifter/Limiter
Accumulator,
rounding, and
logical unit
Multiplier
Input
registers
Accumulator
registers
24+
Overflow

<<<JP630>>>
The DSP Revolution
617
operations are performed on up to three operands, with the 56-bit result always stored
in an accumulator. Example instructions include the following:
ADD
A, B
{A + B →B}
SUB
X, A
{A −X →A}
MPY
±X1, X0, B
{±X1 × X0 →B}
MAC
±Y1, X1, A
{A ± (Y1 × X1) →A}
AND
X1, A
{A and X1 →A}
The arithmetic/logic unit (ALU) can round the least-signiﬁcant half (A0 or B0) into the
most-signiﬁcant half (A1 or B1) of each accumulator. So, for example, an MPY or MAC
instruction can be executed with or without rounding, leading to a 24- or 48-bit result in
an accumulator.
The 56-bit shifter can shift left or right by 1 bit or pass the data through unshifted.
The two data shifters, associated with the A and B accumulators, take 56-bit inputs and
produce 24-bit outputs, each with an “overﬂow” bit. One-bit left or right shift is possible
for scaling purposes. The data limiter causes the largest value of the same sign to be
output when the (shifted) 56-bit data is not representable in 24 bits.
There are also a variety of data movement, bit manipulation, and ﬂow control
instructions, as in any other processor. Details of the instruction set and programming
considerations for Motorola’s DSP56002 processor, along with example applications in
ﬁlter implementation and fast Fourier transform, have been published [ElSh96].
As an example of a ﬂoating-point DSPchip, we brieﬂy review Motorola’s DSP96002,
which has many features of a 32-bit general-purpose processor along with enhance-
ment for DSP applications [Sohi88]. Multiple DSP96002 chips can share a bus and
communicate directly with each other in a parallel conﬁguration with very high
performance.
DSP96002 implements the IEEE single-precision (32-bit) and single-extended-
precision (1 + 11 + 32 = 44 bits, no hidden bit) ﬂoating-point arithmetic. An internal
96-bit format (sign, 20 bits of special tags, 11-bit exponent, 64-bit signiﬁcand) is used
to minimize error accumulation.
The data ALU (Fig. A.4), so named to distinguish it from address computation units,
supports IEEE ﬂoating-point arithmetic in a single instruction cycle or 2 clock cycles.
The full instruction actually takes 3 instruction (or 6 clock) cycles to ﬁnish but is executed
in a three-stage (fetch, decode, execute) pipeline that can accept a new instruction in
every cycle.
The ﬂoating-point add/subtract unit calculates both the sum and the difference of
its two inputs, with one or both results stored in the register ﬁle in the same cycle.
The add/subtract unit is also used for integer arithmetic, a variety of data type con-
versions, and multibit shift operations (taking advantage of its barrel shifter). The
ﬂoating-point multiply unit contains a 32 × 32 hardware multiplier, thus support-
ing both 32-bit signed/unsigned integer multiplication and single-extended-precision
ﬂoating-point multiplication (with 32-bit signiﬁcands) in 1 cycle. A full 64-bit product
is produced.

<<<JP631>>>
618
Appendix: Past, Present, and Future
Figure A.4 Block
diagram of the data
ALU in Motorola’s
DSP96002
(ﬂoating-point)
processor.
I/O format converter
X Bus
Y Bus
32
32
Register file
10   96-bit,
or 10   64-bit, 
or 30   32-bit
Add/
Subtract
unit
Multiply
unit
Special
function
unit
Finally, the special function unit implements division, square-rooting, and logical
operations. Division and square-rooting require multiple instructions, beginning with a
special instruction to generate a reciprocal (root) seed and continuing with a convergence
computation.
DSP96002 accepts, and properly handles, subnormal numbers, but requires 1 addi-
tional machine cycle to process each subnormal source operand or subnormal result. A
“ﬂush-to-zero” underﬂow mode can be optionally selected to force subnormal numbers
to 0, thus avoiding the possible extra cycles and making the execution timing completely
data-independent.
A.5 SUPERCOMPUTERS ON OUR LAPS
In terms of computational power, the lecture-hall-size supercomputers of the 1960s,
an example of which was described in Section A.2, are mere toys, when compared
with even the smallest notebook computer in use today. The driving force behind this
transformation is the microprocessor chip, which was born as a very modest 4-bit CPU
in 1971 and now is a full-blown 64-bit computer with multiple CPUs, memory, and
many other processing functions built in. The path from the 4-bit CPU to the modern
marvel that powers our multigigaﬂops personal computers has gone through numerous
stages of integrating greater functionality onto the chip: ﬁrst came wider and wider
integer arithmetic, with several doublings of the word width, and then integration of
ﬂoating-point arithmetic, cache memory, memory controller, and so on.
As an example, we describe the design of a member of Intel’s Pentium family of
microprocessors: the Intel Pentium Pro, also known as Intel P6. Pentium Pro started a
series of microprocessor products that roughly doubled the pipeline depth of the original
Pentium processor and in time led to Pentium II, Pentium III, and Celeron processors.
Pentium 4 again doubled the pipeline depth, thus introducing far greater design innova-
tions. Nevertheless, we stick with the description of the older P6 processor, because it
is much easier to understand and it conveys our intended message just as well.

<<<JP632>>>
Supercomputers on our Laps
619
The primary design goal for the Intel P6 was to achieve the highest possible per-
formance, while keeping the external appearances compatible with the Pentium and
using the same mass-production technology [Shan98]. Intel’s Pentium II is essentially a
Pentium Pro, complemented with a set of multimedia instructions.
The Intel P6 has a 32-bit architecture, internally using a 64-bit data bus, 36-
bit addresses, and an 80-bit ﬂoating-point format (sign, 15-bit exponent ﬁeld, 64-bit
signiﬁcand). In the terminology of modern microprocessors, P6 is superscalar and
superpipelined: superscalar because it can execute multiple independent instructions
concurrently in its many functional units, as opposed to the Cray machine of Section
A.3, which has concurrent execution only for vector operations; superpipelined because
its instruction execution pipeline with 14+ stages is very deep. The design of the Intel
P6, which was initially based on a 150- to 200-MHz clock, has 21M transistors, roughly
a quarter of which are for the CPU and the rest for the on-chip cache memory. The Intel
P6 is also capable of glueless multiprocessing with up to four processors.
FigureA.5 shows parts of the CPU that are relevant to our discussion. Since high per-
formance in the Intel P6 is gained by out-of-order and speculative instruction execution,
a key component in the design is a reservation station that is essentially a hardware-level
scheduler of micro-operations. Each instruction is converted to one or more micro-
operations, which are then executed in arbitrary order whenever their required operands
are available.
The result of a micro-operation is sent to both the reservation station and a special
unit called the reorder buffer. This latter unit is responsible for making sure that pro-
gram execution remains consistent by committing the results of micro-operations to the
machine’s “retirement” registers only after all pieces of an instruction have terminated
and the instruction’s “turn” to execute has arrived within the sequential program ﬂow.
Thus, if an interrupt occurs, all operations that are in progress can be discarded without
causing inconsistency in the machine’s state. There is a full crossbar between all ﬁve
Integer
execution
unit  0
80
80
80
Port-0
units
Port-1
units
Port 0
Port 1
Port 2
Dedicated to
memory access
(address
generation
units, etc.)
Port 3
Port 4
Reservation
    station
Reorder
buffer and
retirement
register
file
FLP Add
Integer Div
FLP Div
FLP Mult
Shift
Integer
execution
unit  1
Jump
exec
unit
Figure A.5 Key parts of the CPU in the Intel Pentium Pro (P6) microprocessor.

<<<JP633>>>
620
Appendix: Past, Present, and Future
ports of the reservation station so that any returning result can be forwarded directly to
any other unit for the next clock cycle.
Fetching, decoding, and setting up the components of an instruction in the reservation
station takes 8 clock cycles and is performed as an eight-stage pipelined operation. The
retirement process, takes 3 clock cycles and is also pipelined. Sandwiched between the
preceding two pipelines is a variable-length pipeline for instruction execution. For this
middle part of instruction execution, the reservation station needs 2 cycles to ascertain
that the operands are available and to schedule the micro-operation on an appropriate
unit. The operation itself takes 1 cycle for register-to-register integer add and longer for
more complex functions. Because of the multiplicity of functional units with different
latencies, out-of-order and speculative execution (e.g., branch prediction) are crucial to
high performance.
In a sense, the deep pipelining of instruction execution in the Intel P6 and its suc-
cessors makes the performance less sensitive to the arithmetic algorithms and circuits.
Indeed, the bulk of hardware in the P6 is devoted to the management of pipelining and
out-of-order instruction execution rather than to arithmetic circuits. Nevertheless, with
today’s subnanosecond clock cycles, challenges in the design of fast arithmetic circuits
for high-end microprocessors continue unabated.
A.6 TRENDS,OUTLOOK,AND RESOURCES
Arithmetic designs are evolving as a result of changes in the underlying technology. The
move from small-scale integration through medium- and large-scale integration to VLSI
has gradually shifted the emphasis from reducing the number of gates and gate levels
in arithmetic circuits to considering the overall design in terms of both computational
elements and interconnections. Increasing densities have also led to concerns about
adequate I/O bandwidth, clock and power distribution, heat dissipation, and testability.
Design challenges will no doubt continue to emerge as we deal with even newer tech-
nologies and application requirements (fully distributed micropipelines, subnanosecond
arithmetic, low-power design, the quest for petaﬂops, etc.).
Today, designs for arithmetic circuits are developed not by analyzing an elegant
algorithm and optimizing its various parameters, but rather by getting down to the
level of transistors and wires. This explains the proliferation of hybrid designs that use
two or more distinct paradigms (e.g., fast adders using Manchester carry chains along
with carry-lookahead and carry-select structures) to obtain the best designs for given
cost-performance requirements.
Concurrent with developments in the VLSI technology, changing application char-
acteristics have dictated a shift of focus in computer arithmetic from high-speed or
high-throughput designs in mainframe computers to low-cost and low-power designs
for embedded and mobile applications. These have in turn led to renewed interest in bit-
and digit-serial arithmetic as mechanisms to reduce the VLSI area and to improve pack-
ageabilityandtestability. High-performancedesignsrequiringlookaheadandspeculative
execution are expensive and often at odds with the goal of reducing power consumption
to extend the battery life and/or simplify heat dissipation. As a result, the goal of high

<<<JP634>>>
Trends, Outlook, and Resources
621
performance in modern systems is more likely to be pursued via the concurrent opera-
tion of many slow, low-energy units, rather than a single power-hungry processor. Many
challenging problems are being addressed in these areas.
The desirability of synchronous versus asynchronous design has also been reex-
amined. Thus far, synchronous circuits have prevailed in view of their ease of design,
tractability of analysis, and predictability of performance. A secondary, but still impor-
tant, drawback of asynchronous design is the overhead in time and area for the required
handshaking circuits that regulate the ﬂow of data between circuit segments. However,
the higher speeds and packaging densities of modern digital circuits are stretching the
limits of our ability to distribute the clock signal to all the required points [Frie99]. Also,
signal propagation delays over long wires are forcing the designers to modularize the
design (e.g., via systolic arrays), thus in some cases introducing an overhead that is
comparable to that of handshaking for asynchronous operation. Novel design paradigms
and improved tools for the synthesis and analysis of asynchronous systems are slowly
changing the balance in favor of the latter [Hauc95]. For example, low-level pipelining
methods (micropipelines), perhaps extending all the way down to the logic gate level,
are thought to hold promise for the arithmetic circuits of the future.
Fundamentally new technologies and design paradigms may alter the way in which
we view or design arithmetic circuits. Just as the availability of cheap, high-density
memories brought table-lookup methods to the forefront, certain computational elements
being developed in connection with artiﬁcial neural networks may revolutionize our
approach to arithmetic algorithms. As an example, imagine the deep changes that would
ensue if an artiﬁcial neuron capable of summing several weighted inputs and comparing
the result to a ﬁxed threshold could be built from a few transistors. Such a cell would
be considerably more powerful than a switch or standard logic gate, thus leading to new
designs for arithmetic functions [Vass96]. As a second example, researchers in the ﬁeld
of optical computing, eager to take full advantage of parallel operations made possible
by the absence of pin limitations, have paid signiﬁcant attention to redundant number
representations. Yet another example is found in the ﬁeld of multivalued logic, which
has an inherent bias toward high-radix arithmetic.
No review of future technological trends, and their impact on the way we perform
arithmetic, would be complete without a mention of nanotechnology and biotechnology.
Fundamentally new paradigms are required to allow effective computation in these areas.
While the power consumption and heat removal problems will be substantially eased or
eliminated, assembling of components and forging interactions between them require
much work. Numerous studies in these areas have already been conducted and many
more are in the planning and execution stages [Bour03], [Brun07], [Coto05], [Walu06].
On the theoretical front, studies in arithmetic complexity [Pipp87] have been instru-
mental in broadening our understanding of algorithmic speedup methods.Any n-variable
Boolean function that is actually dependent on all n variables (say, the most-signiﬁcant
output bit of an n/2×n/2 unsigned multiplier) requires a gate count or circuit complex-
ity of at least (n) and a delay or circuit depth of (log n). On the other hand, any
Boolean function can be realized by a size-(2n −1), depth-n, complete binary tree of
2-to-1 multiplexers by using the Shannon expansion
f (x1, x2, · · · , xn) = x1 f (1, x2, · · · , xn) ∨x1 f (0, x2, · · · , xn)

<<<JP635>>>
622
Appendix: Past, Present, and Future
for each variable in turn. Key questions in arithmetic complexity thus deal with the
determination of where in the wide spectrum of (n) to O(2n) circuit complexity, and
(log n) to O(n) circuit depth, practical implementations of the various arithmetic
functions may lie, and what can be achieved in terms of cost (delay) if we restrict the
design, say, to having logarithmic delay (linear, or polynomial, cost).
For example, we know in the case of addition/subtraction that the bounds O(n) on
cost and O(log n) on delay are achievable simultaneously by means of certain carry-
lookahead adder designs, say. For multiplication, we can achieve O(log n) delay with
O(n log n log log n) cost in theory, though practical designs for small word widths
have logarithmic delay with O(n2) cost. [The cost lower bound for multiplication was
actually somewhat improved by M. Furer in 2007, with the log log n term replaced by
an asymptotically smaller term, thus bringing us closer to the conjectured O(n log n)
bound. However, because special notation is needed to understand this bound, we stick
with the simpler one given above.] Logarithmic-depth circuits for division are now
known, but they are much more complex than logarithmic-depth multipliers. Note that a
logarithmic-depth multiplier is capable of performing division in O(log2 n) time when
a convergence method is used.
Many innovations have appeared in computer arithmetic since the early days of
electronic computers [Burk46]. The emergence of new technologies and the unwavering
quest for higher performance are bound to create new challenges in the coming years.
These will include completely new challenges, as well as novel or transformed versions
of the ones discussed in the preceding paragraphs. Computer arithmetic designers, who
helped make digital computers into indispensable tools in the six-plus decades since
the introduction of the stored-program concept, will thus have a signiﬁcant role to play
Decade
40s
50s 
60s 
70s 
80s 
90s 
00s 
10s 
     1940 
     2020 
     1960 
     1980 
     2000 
Snapshot
[Burk46] 
Key ideas, innovations, advancements, technology traits, and milestones
Binary format, carry chains, stored carry, carry-save multiplier, restoring divider 
[Shaw50] 
Carry-lookahead adder, high-radix multiplier, SRT divider, CORDIC algorithms 
Tree/array multiplier, high-radix and convergence dividers, signed-digit, floating point 
Pipelined arithmetic, vector supercomputer, microprocessor, ARITH-2/3/4 symposia 
VLSI, embedded system, digital signal processor, on-line arithmetic, IEEE 754-1985 
CMOS dominance, circuit-level optimization, hybrid design, deep pipeline, table lookup 
Power/energy/heat reduction, media processing, FPGA-based arithmetic, IEEE 754-2008
Teraflops on laptop (or pocket device?), asynchronous design, nanodevice arithmetic
[MacS61]
[Thor70] 
[Ande67]
[Swar90] 
[This book] 
[Garn76]
 
Figure A.6 Computer arithmetic through the decades.

<<<JP636>>>
Problems
623
in making them even more useful and ubiquitous as digital computing approaches its
diamond anniversary.
We summarize our discussions of the history, current status, and future of computer
arithmetic in the timeline depicted in Fig. A.6. As for resources that would allow the
reader to gain additional insights in computer arithmetic, we have already listed some
general references at the end of the Preface and topic-speciﬁc references at the end of each
chapter (and this appendix). Other resources, which are nowadays quite extensive, thanks
to electronic information dissemination, can be found through Internet search engines.
For example, a search for “computer arithmetic” on Google yields some quarter-of-
a-million items, not counting additional hits for “digital arithmetic,” “arithmetic/logic
unit,” and other related terms. The author maintains a list of Web resources for computer
arithmetic on his companion website for this book: it can be reached via the publisher’s
page for the book and through the author’s faculty Web site at University of California,
Santa Barbara (UCSB).
PROBLEMS
A.1 Historical perspective
Using the discussion in Section A.1 and Fig. A.6 as a basis, and consulting addi-
tional references as needed, draw a detailed time line that shows signiﬁcant events
in the development of digital computer arithmetic. On your time line, identify
what you consider to be the three most-signiﬁcant ideas or events related to the
topics discussed in each of the Parts I to IV of this book. Brieﬂy justify your
choices. Include ﬂoating-point numbers and arithmetic in your discussion (e.g.,
ﬂoating-point representation in Part I, ﬂoating-point addition in Part II).
A.2 Arithmetic before electronic digital computers
a. Study the implementation of arithmetic operations on mechanical calcula-
tors and other machines that preceded electronic computers. Prepare a report
(including a time line) discussing the developments of key ideas and various
implementations.
b. Repeat part a for electronic analog computers. Compare the ideas and methods
to those of digital arithmetic and discuss.
A.3 IBM System/360 Model 91
a. Based on the description in Section A.2 and what you learned about conver-
gence division in Chapter 16, determine the size of the lookup table providing
the initial approximation to the divisor reciprocal in the IBM System/360
Model 91.
b. Estimate, using back-of-the-envelope calculations, the MFLOPS computa-
tional power of the IBM System/360 Model 91 in million ﬂoating-point
operations per second (MFLOPS). Assume complete overlap between instruc-
tion preparation and execution. Use an instruction mix of 60% add, 30%
multiply, and 10% divide.
c. Study the integer arithmetic capabilities of the IBM System/360 Model 91.
