<<<BOOK PAGE 524>>>
25
High-Throughput
Arithmetic
■■■
“The HMO maternity ward,drive-through procedure:(1) Pull up to the delivery window,(2)
Push,(3) Pay at the cashier window,(4) Pick up baby.Have a nice day!”
B A S E D O N A ’ N O N S E Q U I T U R ’ C A R TO O N B Y W I L E Y
■■■
W
ith very few exceptions, our discussions to this point have focused on
methods of speeding up arithmetic computations by reducing the input-
to-output latency, deﬁned as the time interval between the application of inputs
and the availability of outputs.When two equal-cost implementations were possible,
we always chose the one offering a smaller latency. Once we look beyond individ-
ual operations, however, latency ceases to be the only indicator of performance.
In pipelined mode of operation, arithmetic operations may have higher latencies
owing to pipelining overhead. However, one hardware unit can perform multiple
overlapped operations at once. This concurrency often more than makes up for the
higher latency.Chapter topics include:
25.1 Pipelining of Arithmetic Functions
25.2 Clock Rate and Throughput
25.3 The Earle Latch
25.4 Parallel and Digit-Serial Pipelines
25.5 On-Line or Digit-Pipelined Arithmetic
25.6 Systolic Arithmetic Units
25.1 PIPELINING OF ARITHMETIC FUNCTIONS
The key ﬁgure of merit for a pipelined implementation is its computational throughput,
deﬁned as the number of operations that can be performed per unit of time. The inverse
523

<<<BOOK PAGE 525>>>
524
Chapter 25 High-Throughput Arithmetic
of throughput, the pipelining period, is the time interval between the application of
successive input data sets for proper overlapped computation. Latency is still important
for two reasons:
1. There may be an occasional need to perform single operations that are not
immediately followed by others of the same type.
2. Data dependencies or conditional execution (pipeline hazards) may force us to
insert bubbles into the pipeline or to drain it altogether.
However, in pipelined arithmetic, latency assumes a secondary role. We will see later
in this chapter that at times, a pipelined implementation may improve the latency of a
multistep arithmetic computation while also reducing its hardware cost. In such a case,
pipelining is obviously the preferred method, offering the best of all worlds.
Note that we have already discussed several pipelined implementations of arithmetic
operations. The reader should refer to Fig. 11.17 for a pipelined partial-tree multiplier
with a stage latency of two full-adder levels and to Fig. 11.18 for ﬂexible pipelining
of an array multiplier, with a desired number of full-adder levels in each stage. Similar
pipelining strategies are applicable to the array dividers of Figs. 15.2 and 15.3 and to the
array square-rooter of Fig. 21.8. Finally, in Section 16.5, we indicated how a two-stage
pipelined multiplier can nearly double the speed of division via repeated multiplications
(see Fig. 16.6). In the ﬁrst three sections of this chapter, we present some general
design considerations for effective pipelining. The reader should be able to apply these
methods to designs of the types just mentioned with no difﬁculty. Some possibilities
are explored in the end-of-chapter problems. Applications of pipelining methods to bit-
or digit-serial computation, and the design of systolic arithmetic units, are covered in
Sections 25.4–25.6.
Figure 25.1 shows the structure of a σ-stage arithmetic pipeline. Before considering
a number of practical issues in the design of arithmetic pipelines, it is instructive to study
the trade-offs among throughput, latency, and implementation cost.
Consider an arithmetic function unit whose initial cost is g (in number of logic gates,
say) and has a latency of t. Our analysis will be based on a number of simplifying
assumptions:
1. The pipelining time overhead per stage is τ (latching time delay).
2. The pipelining cost overhead per stage is γ (latching cost).
3. The function can be divided into σ stages of equal latency for any σ.
Figure 25.1 An
arithmetic function
unit and its σ-stage
pipelined version.
In
Out
1
. . .
Interstage latches
Input
latches
Output
latches
In
Out
Nonpipelined
(t/σ) + τ
2
σ
3
t + στ
t

<<<BOOK PAGE 526>>>
Pipelining of Arithmetic Functions
525
Then, the latency T, throughput R, and cost G of the pipelined implementation are
Latency
T = t + στ
Throughput
R =
1
T/σ =
1
t/σ + τ
Cost
G = g + σγ
We see that, theoretically, throughput approaches its maximum possible value of 1/τ
when σ becomes very large. In practice, however, it does not pay to reduce t/σ below
a certain threshold; typically four logic gate levels. Even then, one seldom divides the
logic into four-level slices blindly; rather, one looks for natural boundaries at which
interstage signals (and thus latching costs) will be minimized, even though this may lead
to additional stage delay. But let us assume, for the sake of simplifying our analysis, that
pipeline stage delay is uniformly equal to four gate delays (4δ). Then, σ = t/(4δ) and
Latency
T = t

1 + τ
4δ

Throughput
R =
1
T/σ =
1
4δ + τ
Cost
G = g

1 + tγ
4gδ

The preceding equalities give us an idea of the overhead in latency, τ/(4δ), and imple-
mentation cost, tγ/(4gδ), to maximize the computational throughput within practical
limits.
If throughput is not the single most important factor, one might try to maximize
a composite ﬁgure of merit. For example, throughput per unit cost may be taken as
representing cost-effectiveness:
E = R
G =
σ
(t + στ)(g + σγ )
To maximize E, we compute dE/dσ:
dE
dσ =
tg −σ 2τγ
(t + στ)2(g + σγ )2
Equating dE/dσ with 0 yields
σ opt =
 tg
τγ
1/2
Our simpliﬁed analysis thus suggests that the optimal number of pipeline stages for
maximal cost-effectiveness is directly related to the latency and cost of the original
function and inversely related to pipelining delay and cost overheads: it pays to have
many pipeline stages if the function to be implemented is very slow or highly complex,
but few pipeline stages are in order if the time and/or cost overhead of pipelining is too
high. All in all, not a surprising result!
As an example, with t = 40δ, g = 500 gates, τ = 4δ, and γ = 50 gates, we obtain
σ opt = 10 stages. The result of pipelining is that both cost and latency increase by a
factor of 2 and throughput improves by a factor of 5. When pipeline hazards are factored
in, the optimal number of stages will be much smaller.

<<<BOOK PAGE 527>>>
526
Chapter 25 High-Throughput Arithmetic
25.2 CLOCK RATE AND THROUGHPUT
Consider a σ-stage pipeline and let the worst-case pipeline stage delay be tstage. Suppose
one set of inputs is applied to the pipeline at time t1. At time t1 + tstage + τ, the results of
this set are safely stored in output latches for the stage. Applying the next set of inputs at
time t2 satisfying t2 ≥t1 +tstage +τ is enough to ensure proper pipeline operation. With
the preceding condition, one set of inputs can be applied to the pipeline every tstage + τ
time units:
Clock period = t = t2 −t1 ≥tstage + τ
Pipeline throughput is simply the inverse of the clock period:
Throughput =
1
clock period ≤
1
tstage + τ
The preceding analysis assumes that a single clock signal is distributed to all circuit
elements and that all latches are clocked at precisely the same time. In reality, we have
some uncontrolled or random clock skew that may cause the clock signal to arrive at
point B before or after its arrival at point A. With proper design of the clock distribution
network, we can place an upper bound ±ε on the amount of uncontrolled clock skew at
the input and output latches of a pipeline stage. Then, the clock period is lower-bounded
as follows:
Clock period = t = t2 −t1 ≥tstage + τ + 2ε
The term 2ε is included because we must assume the worst case when input latches
are clocked later and the output latches earlier than planned, reducing the time that is
available for stage computation by 2ε. We thus see that uncontrolled clock skew degrades
the throughput that would otherwise be achievable.
For a more detailed examination of pipelining, we note that the stage delay tstage
is really not a constant but varies from tmin to tmax, say; tmin corresponds to fast paths
through the logic (fewer gates or faster gates on the path) and tmax to slow paths. Suppose
that one set of inputs is applied at time t1. At time t1 + tmax + τ, the results of this set
are safely stored in output latches for the stage. Assuming that the next set of inputs are
applied at time t2, we must have
t2 + tmin ≥t1 + tmax + τ
if the signals for the second set of inputs are not to get intermixed with those of the
preceding inputs. This places a lower bound on the clock period:
Clock period = t = t2 −t1 ≥tmax −tmin + τ
The preceding inequality suggests that we can approach the maximum possible through-
put of 1/τ without necessarily requiring very small stage delay. All that is required is to
have a very small delay variance tmax −tmin.

<<<BOOK PAGE 528>>>
Clock Rate and Throughput
527
Wave front 
i
Wave front 
i + 1
Wave front 
i + 2
Faster signals
Slower signals
Allowance for 
latching, skew, etc.
Wave front 
i + 3
(just arriving at stage output)
t      – t
max
min
(not yet applied)
Stage output
Stage Input
Figure 25.2 Wave pipelining allows multiple computational wave fronts to coexist in a single
pipeline stage.
Stage
input
Stage
output
Time
Logic depth
t min
t max
Clock cycle
 Controlled
clock skew
Stage
input
Stage
output
Time
t min
t max
Clock cycle
Stationary
region
(unshaded)
Transient
region
(shaded)
Logic depth
(a) Ordinary pipelining
(b) Wave pipelining
Figure 25.3 An alternate view of the throughput advantage of wave pipelining over ordinary
pipelining using a time-space representation.
Using the delay through a pipeline segment as a kind of temporary storage, thus
allowing “waves” of unlatched data to travel through the pipeline, is known as wave
pipelining [Flyn95]. The concept of wave pipelining is depicted in Fig. 25.2, with the
wave fronts showing the spatial distribution of fast and slow signals at a given instant.
Figure 25.3, an alternate representation of wave pipelining, shows why it is acceptable
for the transient regions of consecutive input sets to overlap in time (horizontally) as long

<<<BOOK PAGE 529>>>
528
Chapter 25 High-Throughput Arithmetic
as they are separated in space (vertically). Note that conventional pipelining provides
separation in both time and space.
The preceding discussion reveals two distinct strategies for increasing the throughput
of a pipelined function unit: (1) the traditional method of reducing tmax, and (2) the
counterintuitive method of increasing tmin so that it is as close to tmax as possible. In the
latter method, reducing tmax is beneﬁcial only to the extent that such reduction softens
the performance penalty of pipeline hazards.
Suppose, for the moment, that tmax −tmin = 0. Then, the clock period can be taken
to be t ≥τ and the throughput becomes 1/t ≤1/τ. Since a new input enters the
pipeline stage every t time units and the stage latency is tmax +τ, the clock application
at the output latch must be skewed by (tmax + τ) mod t to ensure proper sampling of
the results. For example, if tmax + τ = 12 ns and t = 5 ns, then a clock skew of +2 ns
is required at the stage output latches relative to the input latches. This controlled clock
skew is a necessary part of wave pipelining.
More generally, tmax −tmin is nonzero and perhaps different for the various pipeline
stages. Then, the clock period t is lower-bounded as
t ≥max
1≤i≤σ

t(i)
max −t(i)
min + τ

and the controlled clock skew at the output of stage i will be
S(i) =
i

j=1

t(j)
max + τ

mod t
We still need to worry about uncontrolled or random clock skew. With the amount of
uncontrolled skew upper-bounded by ±ε, we must have
Clock period = t = t2 −t1 ≥tmax −tmin + τ + 4ε
We include the term 4ε because at input, the clocking of the ﬁrst set of inputs may lag by
ε, while that of the second set leads by ε (a net difference of 2ε). In the worst case, the
same difference of 2ε may exist at the output, but in the opposite direction. We thus see
that uncontrolled clock skew has a larger effect on the performance of wave pipelining
than on standard pipelining, especially in relative terms (ε is now a larger fraction of the
clock period).
25.3 THE EARLE LATCH
The Earle latch, named after its inventor, J. G. Earle, is a storage element whose output
z follows the data input d whenever the clock input C becomes 1. The input data is thus
sampled and held in the latch as the clock goes from 1 to 0. Once the input has been
sampled, the latch is insensitive to further changes in d as long as the clock C remains
at 0. Earle designed the latch of Fig. 25.4 speciﬁcally for latching carry-save adders.
Earlier, we derived constraints on the minimum clock period t or maximum clock
rate 1/t. The clock period t has two parts: the duration of the clock being high, Chigh,

<<<BOOK PAGE 530>>>
The Earle Latch
529
Figure 25.4
Two-level AND-OR
realization of the
Earle latch.
d
C
C–
z
w
x
y
and duration of the clock being low, Clow.
t = Chigh + Clow
Now, consider a pipeline stage that is preceded and followed by Earle latches. The
duration of the clock being high in each period, Chigh, must satisfy the inequalities
3δmax −δmin + Smax(C↑, ¯C↓) ≤Chigh ≤2δmin + tmin
where δmax and δmin are maximum and minimum gate delays and Smax(C↑, ¯C↓) ≥0
is the maximum skew between C going high and ¯C going low at the latch input. The
right-hand inequality, constraining the maximum width of the clock pulse, simply asserts
that the clock must go low before the fastest signals from the next input data set can
affect the input z of the Earle latch at the end of the stage. The left-hand inequality asserts
that the clock pulse must be wide enough to ensure that valid data is stored in the output
latch and to avoid logic hazard, should the 0-to-1 transition of C slightly lead the 1-to-0
transition of ¯C at the latch inputs.
The constraints given in the preceding paragraph must be augmented with additional
terms to account for clock skew between pipeline segments and to ensure that logic
hazards do not lead to the latching of erroneous data. For a more detailed discussion, see
[Flyn82, pp. 221–222].
An attractive property of the Earle latch is that it can be merged with the two-level
AND-OR logic that precedes it. For example, to latch
d = vw ∨xy
coming from a two-level AND-OR circuit, we substitute for d in the equation for the
Earle latch
z = dC ∨dz ∨Cz
to get the following combined (logic and latch) circuit implementing z = vw ∨xy:
z = (vw ∨xy)C ∨(vw ∨xy)z ∨Cz
= vwC ∨xyC ∨vwz ∨xyz ∨Cz
The resulting two-level AND-OR circuit is shown in Fig. 25.5.

<<<BOOK PAGE 531>>>
530
Chapter 25 High-Throughput Arithmetic
Figure 25.5
Two-level AND-OR
latched realization of
the function
z = vw ∨xy.
C
C
z
v
w
x
y
Alternate designs for the Earle latch exist. These designs optimize the latch for
speciﬁc applications or for ease of implementation with target technologies. For example,
a modiﬁed Earle latch has been designed [Yang02] that does not require the data input
d to be fanned out, as in the original Earle latch of Fig. 25.4. This feature leads to some
simpliﬁcations when the latching function is merged with a two-level AND-OR logic
circuit that precedes it (see Fig. 25.5).
25.4 PARALLEL AND DIGIT-SERIAL PIPELINES
Consider the computation
z =
(a + b)cd
e −f
1/2
To compute z, we need to perform two additions, two multiplications, a division,
and a square-root extraction, in the order prescribed by the ﬂow graph shown in Fig.
25.6a. Assuming that multiplication, division, and square-rooting take roughly the same
amount of time and that addition is much faster, a timing diagram for the computation
can be drawn as shown in Fig. 25.6b. In deriving this timing diagram, it is assumed
that enough hardware components are available to do the computation with maximum
possible parallelism. This implies the availability of one adder and perhaps a shared
multiply/divide/square-root unit.
If the preceding computation is to be performed repeatedly, a pipelined implementa-
tion might be contemplated. By using a separate function unit for each node in the ﬂow
graph of Fig. 25.6a and inserting latches between consecutive operations, the through-
put can be increased by roughly a factor of 4. However, the requirement for separate
multiply, divide, and square-root units would cause the implementation cost to become
quite high.
How would one go about doing this computation bit-serially? Bit-serial addition,
with the inputs supplied beginning from the least-signiﬁcant bit (LSB), is easy. We also

<<<BOOK PAGE 532>>>
Parallel and Digit-Serial Pipelines
531
+
–
×
×
√
a
b
c
d
e
f
z
/
(a + b) c d
e – f
Latch positions in a four-stage pipeline
(a) Flow graph
+
×
–
×
√
  Output
available
t = 0
Latency (nonpipelined)
Time
/
Pipelining period
(b) Timing diagram
Figure 25.6 Flow graph representation of an arithmetic expression and the associated
timing diagram for its evaluation with digit-parallel computation.
know how to design an LSB-ﬁrst, bit-serial multiplier (Section 12.3). With LSB-ﬁrst,
bit-serial computation, as soon as the LSBs of a + b and c × d are produced, a second
bit-serial multiplier can begin the computation of (a+b)×(cd). This bit-level pipelining
is attractive because each additional function unit on the critical path adds very little to
the overall latency.
Unfortunately, however, both division and square-rooting must be performed begin-
ning from the most-signiﬁcant bit (MSB). So, we cannot begin the division operation
in Fig. 25.6a until the results of (a + b) × (cd) and e −f are available in full. Even
then, the division operation cannot be performed in an MSB-ﬁrst, bit-serial fashion since
the MSB of the quotient q in general depends on all the bits of dividend and divisor.
To see this, consider the decimal division example 0.1234/0.2469. After inspecting the
most-signiﬁcant digits of the two operands, we cannot tell what the MSD of the quotient
should be, since
0.1xxx
0.2xxx
can be as large as 0.1999/0.2000 ≈0.9995 or as small as 0.1000/0.2999 ≈0.3334 (the
MSD of the quotient can thus assume any value in [3, 9]). After seeing the second digit
of each operand, the ambiguity is still not resolved, since
0.12xx
0.24xx
can be as large as 0.1299/0.2400 ≈0.5413 or as small as 0.1200/0.2499 ≈0.4802. The
next pair of digits further restricts the quotient value to the interval from 0.1239/0.2460

<<<BOOK PAGE 533>>>
532
Chapter 25 High-Throughput Arithmetic
≈0.5037 to 0.1230/0.2469 ≈0.4982 but does not resolve the ambiguity in the MSD
of q. Only after seeing all digits of both operands are we able to decide that q−1 = 4.
To summarize the preceding discussion, with standard number representations,
pipelined bit-serial or digit-serial arithmetic is feasible only for computations involv-
ing additions and multiplications. These operations are done in LSB-ﬁrst order, with the
output from one block immediately fed to the next block. Division and square-rooting
force us to assemble the entire operand(s) and then use one of the algorithms discussed
earlier in the book.
If we are allowed to produce the output in a redundant format, quotient/root digits can
be produced after only a few bits of each operand have been seen, since the precision
required for selecting the next quotient digit is limited. This is essentially because a
redundant representation allows us to recover from an underestimated or overestimated
quotient or root digit. However, the fundamental difference between LSB-ﬁrst addition
and multiplication and MSB-ﬁrst division and square-rooting remains and renders a
bit-serial approach unattractive.
25.5 ON-LINE OR DIGIT-PIPELINED ARITHMETIC
Redundant number representation can be used to solve the problems discussed at the end
of Section 25.4. With redundant numbers, not only can we perform division and square-
rooting digit-serially, but we can also convert addition and multiplication to MSD-ﬁrst
operations, thus allowing for smooth ﬂow of data in a pipelined digit-serial fashion
[Erce84], [Erce88].
Figure 25.7 contrasts the timing of the digit-parallel computation scheme (Fig. 25.6)
to that of a digit-pipelined scheme. Operations now take somewhat longer to complete
Latencies associated with
various operations
–
Digit-pipelined
 √
  Output
complete
Output
×
×
Begin next computation
+
×
–
×
  Output
available
t = 0
Time
(a + b) cd
e –f
/
Digit-parallel
+
/
 √
Figure 25.7 Digit-parallel versus digit-pipelined computation.

<<<BOOK PAGE 534>>>
On-Line or Digit-Pipelined Arithmetic
533
(though not much longer, since the larger number of cycles required is partially offset by
the higher clock rate allowed for the simpler incremental computation steps). However,
the various computation steps are almost completely overlapped, leading to smaller
overall latency despite the simpler hardware. The reason for varying operation latencies,
deﬁned as the time interval between receiving the ith input digits and producing the ith
output digit, will become clear later in this section.
Again, if the computation is to be performed repeatedly, the pattern shown in the
digit-pipelined part of Fig. 25.7 can be repeated in time (with a small gap for resetting of
the storage elements). Thus, the second computation can begin as soon as all the digits
of the current inputs have been used up.
All that remains is to show that arithmetic operations can be performed in a digit-
serial MSD-ﬁrst fashion, producing the stream of output digits with a small, ﬁxed
latency in each case. Binary signed-digit (BSD) operands, using the digit set [−1, 1]
in radix 2, result in the simplest digit-pipelined arithmetic hardware. A higher radix r,
with its correspondingly larger digit set, leads to greater circuit complexity, as well
as higher pin count, but may improve the performance, given the smaller number
of cycles required to supply the inputs. An improvement in performance is uncertain
because the more complicated circuit will likely dictate a lower clock rate, thus nulli-
fying some or all of the gain due to reduced cycle count. In practice, r > 16 is seldom
cost-effective.
Floating-point numbers present additional problems in that the exponents must arrive
ﬁrst and the signiﬁcands must be processed according to the result of the exponent
preprocessing. However, theadjustmentsneededarestraightforwardanddonotaffectthe
fundamental notions being emphasized here. In what follows, we will deal exclusively
with fractional signed-digit operands in the range (−1, 1).
Addition is the simplest operation. We already know that in carry-free addition, the
(−i)th result digit is a function of the (−i)th and (−i −1)th operand digits. Thus, upon
receiving the two MSDs of the input operands, we have all the information that we need
to produce the MSD of the sum/difference.
Figure 25.8 shows a digit-serial MSD-ﬁrst implementation of carry-free addition.
The circuit shown in Fig. 25.8 essentially corresponds to a diagonal slice of Fig. 3.2b
and imposes a latency of 1 clock cycle between its input and output.
When carry-free addition is inapplicable (e.g., as is the case for BSD inputs), a
limited-carry addition algorithm must be implemented. For example, using a diagonal
Decimal example:
.1 8 
.4 2 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
.5
Shaded boxes show the 
“unseen” or unprocessed 
parts of the operands and 
unknown part of the sum
+
x
y
t
w
s
w
–i+1
–i+1
–i+1
–i
–i
–i
Latch
Latch
(interim sum)
-
Figure 25.8 Digit-pipelined MSD-ﬁrst carry-free addition.

<<<BOOK PAGE 535>>>
534
Chapter 25 High-Throughput Arithmetic
BSD example:
.1 0 1
.0 1 1 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
.1
Shaded boxes show the 
“unseen” or unprocessed 
parts of the operands and 
unknown part of the sum
+
x
y
e
p
s
p
–i+2
–i +1
–i+1
–i
–i
–i
Latch
Latch
(position sum)
w–i+1(interim sum)
w–i+2
Latch
t –i+2
-
Figure 25.9 Digit-pipelined MSD-ﬁrst limited-carry addition.
Figure 25.10
Digit-pipelined
MSD-ﬁrst
multiplication
process.
. 1 0 1
. 1 1 1 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
.  1 0 1
.
-1 0 -1
.     
1 0 1
×
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
. 0
 Already
Unknown
Being processed
a
x
-
 processed
slice of Fig. 3.12a, we obtain the design shown in Fig. 25.9 for digit-pipelined limited-
carry addition with a latency of 2 clock cycles.
Multiplication can also be done with a delay of 1 or 2 clock cycles, depending on
whether the chosen representation supports carry-free addition. Figure 25.10 depicts
the process. In the ith cycle, i −1 digits of the operands a and x have already been
received and are available in internal registers; call these a[−1,−i+1] and x[−1,−i+1].
Also an accumulated partial product p(i−1) (true sum of the processed terms, minus
the digits that have already been output) is available. When a−i and x−i are received,
the three terms x−ia[−1,−i+1] (two-digit horizontal value in Fig. 25.10), a−ix[−1,−i+1]
(two-digit diagonal value in Fig. 25.10), and a−ix−i (circled term in Fig. 25.10) are
computed and combined with the left-shifted p(i−1) to produce an interim partial prod-
uct by a fast carry-free (limited-carry) addition process. The MSD of this result is
the next output digit and is thus discarded before the next step. The remaining digits
form p(i).
Figure25.11depictsapossiblehardwarerealizationfordigit-pipelinedmultiplication
of BSD fractions. The partial multiplicand a[−1,−i+1] and partial multiplier x[−1,−i+1]
are held in registers and the incoming digits a−i and x−i are used to select the appropriate
multiples of the two for combining with the product residual p(i−1). This three-operand
carry-free addition yields an output digit and a new product residual p(i) to be used

<<<BOOK PAGE 536>>>
On-Line or Digit-Pipelined Arithmetic
535
a
Mux
–1    1    0
0
x
Mux
0
p
Three-operand carry-free adder
Partial multiplicand
Partial multiplier
Product residual
Shift
–i+2
–i
–i
–1    1    0
MSD
Figure 25.11 Digit-pipelined MSD-ﬁrst BSD multiplier.
Table 25.1 Example of digit-pipelined division showing the requirement for 3
cycles of delay before quotient digits can be output (radix = 4, digit set = [−2, 2])
Cycle
Dividend
Divisor
q Range
q−1 Range
1
(.0 · · · )four
(.1 · · · )four
(−2/3, 2/3)
[−2, 2]
2
(.0 0 · · · )four
(.1-2 · · · )four
(−2/4, 2/4)
[−2, 2]
3
(.0 0 1 · · · )four
(.1-2-2 · · · )four
(1/16, 5/16)
[0, 1]
4
(.0 0 1 0 · · · )four
(.1-2-2-2 · · · )four
(10/64, 14/64)
1
for the next step. Note that if the digit-pipelined multiplier is implemented based on
Fig. 25.10, then a−i and x−i must be inserted into the appropriate position in their
respective registers. Alternatively, each of the digits a−i and x−i may be inserted into
the least-signiﬁcant digit (LSD) of its respective register, with p−i+2 extracted from the
appropriate position of the three-operand sum.
Digit-pipelined division is more complicated and involves a delay of 3–4 cycles.
Intuitively, the reason for the higher delay in division is seen to lie in the uncertainties
in the dividend and divisor, which affect the result in opposite directions. The division
example of Table 25.1 shows that with r = 4 and digit set [−2, 2], the ﬁrst quotient
digit q−1 may remain ambiguous until the fourth digit in the dividend and divisor have
appeared. Note that with the given digit set, only fractions in the range (−2/3, 2/3)
are representable (we have assumed that overﬂow is impossible and that the quotient is
indeed a fraction).
Note that the example in Table 25.1 shows only that the worst-case delay with this
particular representation is at least 3 cycles. One can in fact prove that 3 cycles of delay
always is sufﬁcient, provided the number representation system used supports carry-
free addition. If limited-carry addition is called for, 4 cycles of delay is necessary and
sufﬁcient.

<<<BOOK PAGE 537>>>
536
Chapter 25 High-Throughput Arithmetic
Output already 
produced
On-line arithmetic unit
Processed
input parts
Unprocessed
input parts
Residual
Figure 25.12 Conceptual view of on-line or digit-pipelined arithmetic.
Table 25.2 Examples of digit-pipelined square-root computation
showing the requirement for 1–2 cycles of delay before root digits
can be output (radix = 10, digit set = [−6, 6], and radix = 2, digit
set = [−1, 1])
Cycle
Radicand
q Range
q−1 Range
1
(.3 · · · )ten
(√7/30, √11/30)
[5, 6]
2
(.3 4 · · · )ten
(√1/3, √26/75)
6
1
(.0 · · · )two
(0, √1/2)
[0, 1]
2
(.0 1 · · · )two
(0, √1/2)
[0, 1]
3
(.0 1 1 · · · )two
(1/2, √1/2)
1
The algorithm for digit-pipelined division and its hardware implementation are sim-
ilar to those of multiplication; both follow the general ﬂow of on-line arithmetic, shown
schematically in Fig. 25.12. A residual is maintained that is in effect the result of sub-
tracting the product of the known digits of the quotient q and the known digits of the
divisor d from the dividend z. With each new digit of q that becomes known, the product
of that digit and the partial divisor, as well as the product of the new digit of d and the
partial quotient, must be subtracted from the residual. A few bits of the residual, and of
the divisor d, may then be used to estimate the next quotient digit.
Square-rooting can be done with a delay of 1–2 cycles, depending on the number
representation system used. The ﬁrst square-rooting example in Table 25.2 shows that,
with r = 10 and digit set [−6, 6], the ﬁrst root digit q−1 may remain ambiguous until
the second digit in the radicand has appeared. The second example, with r = 2 and
digit set [−1, 1], shows that 2 cycles of delay may be needed in some cases. Again the
algorithm and required hardware for digit-pipelined square-rooting are similar to those
for digit-pipelined multiplication and division.
25.6 SYSTOLIC ARITHMETIC UNITS
In our discussion of the design of semisystolic and systolic bit-serial unsigned or 2’s-
complement multipliers (Section 12.3), we noted that the systolic design paradigm allows
us to implement certain functions of interest as regular arrays of simple cells (ideally,

<<<BOOK PAGE 538>>>
Systolic Arithmetic Units
537
all identical) with intercell signals carried by short, local wires. To be more precise, we
must add to the requirements above the following: no unlatched signal can be allowed
to propagate across multiple cells (for otherwise a ripple-carry adder would qualify as a
systolic design).
The term “systolic arrays” [Kung82] was coined to characterize cellular circuits in
which data elements, entering at the boundaries, advance from cell to cell, are trans-
formed in an incremental fashion, and eventually exit the array, with the lock-step data
movement across the array likened to the rhythmic pumping of blood in the veins. As
digital circuits have become faster and denser, we can no longer ignore the contribu-
tion of signal propagation delay on long wires to the latency of various computational
circuits. In fact, propagation delay, as opposed to switching or gate delays, is now the
main source of latency in modern digital design. Thus, any high-performance design
requires great attention to minimizing wire length, and in the extreme, adherence to
systolic design principles.
Fortunately, we already have all the tools needed to design high-performance systolic
arithmetic circuits. In what follows, we present four examples.
An array multiplier can be transformed into a bit-parallel systolic multiplier through
the application of pipelining methods discussed earlier in this chapter. Referring to the
pipelined 5 × 5 array multiplier in Fig. 11.18, we note that it requires the bits ai and xj
to be broadcast within the cells of the same column and row, respectively. Now, if ai is
supplied to the cell at the top row and is then passed from cell to cell in the same column
on successive clock ticks, the operation of each cell will be delayed by one time step with
respect to the cell immediately above it. If the timing of the elements is adjusted, through
insertion of latches where needed, such that all other inputs to the cell experience the
same added delay, the function realized by the circuit will be unaffected. This type of
transformation is known as systolic retiming. Additional delays must be inserted on the
p outputs if all bits of the product are to become available at once. Asimilar modiﬁcation
to remove the broadcasting of the xj signals completes the design.
Similarly, a digit-pipelined multiplier can be designed in systolic form to maximize
the clock rate and thus the computation speed. Since in the design shown in Fig. 25.11,
a−i and x−i are effectively broadcast to a set of 2-to-1 multiplexers (muxes), long wires
and large fan-outs are involved. Since, however, not all the digits of x−ia[−1,−i+1] and
a−ix[−1,−i+1] are needed right away, we can convert the design into a cellular array
(Fig. 25.13) in which only the MSDs of x−ia[−1,−i+1] and a−ix[−1,−i+1] are immediately
formed at the head cell, with a−i and x−i passed on to the right on the next clock tick to
allow the formation of other digits in subsequent clock cycles and passing of the results
to the left when they are needed. Supplying the details of this systolic design is left as
an exercise.
a
x–i
–i
. . .
. . .
. . .
p–i+1
Head
cell
Figure 25.13 High-level design of a systolic radix-4,digit-pipelined multiplier.

<<<BOOK PAGE 539>>>
538
Chapter 25 High-Throughput Arithmetic
x input
x input
D
D
D
2D
2D
2D
D
D
D
h(1)
h(1)
h(0)
h(0)














h input
y output
y output
enable
enable
(a) Conventional: Broadcast control, broadcast data
(b) Systolic: Pipelined control, Pipelined data
Figure 25.14 Conventional and systolic realizations of a programmable FIR ﬁlter.
It has been observed that the Montgomery modular multiplication algorithm lends
itself quite well to systolic realization [Walt93], because it resolves the conﬂict between
the direction of movement of the carry signals (LSB to MSB) and the decision process
for taking away multiples of the modulus m (MSBs). Recall from our discussion at the
end of Section 15.4 that the choice of whether to modify an obtained partial result in
Montgomery modular multiplication is based on its LSB (LSD in higher radices). Thus,
a structure similar to an array multiplier, with more complex cells to accommodate the
storage of partial-product bits and the operation of adding m, can be used to perform the
process in a systolic fashion, at very high clock rates. Several systolic modular multiplier
designs have been proposed over the years. Example designs can be found elsewhere
[Nedj06], [Walt93].
Our ﬁnal example pertains to the design of programmable ﬁnite impulse response
(FIR) ﬁlters, traditionally realized as in Fig. 25.14a. The computation of an N-tap FIR
ﬁlter is as follows:
y(t) =
N−1

i=0
h(i)x(t −i)
Thus, the output y at time step t is a function of the ﬁlter inputs at time steps t −i, for
0 ≤i ≤N −1. Programmability means that the coefﬁcients h(i) can be dynamically
modiﬁed to adapt to changing conditions. A special control signal allows the ﬁlter to
switch between programming (adaptation) and normal operation modes when desired.
A systolic version of the FIR ﬁlter, with pipelined data and control, is depicted in Fig.
25.14b [Parh03]. Detailed modeling has shown that as integrated circuit speed improves
via technology scaling, the systolic design of Fig. 25.14b preserves nearly all the speed
beneﬁts, whereas the conventional design loses nearly 50% of the advantage with as few
as 20 taps and almost all of it with 200 taps, owing to interconnect delays and effects of
loading [Parh03].

<<<BOOK PAGE 540>>>
Problems
539
PROBLEMS
25.1 Maximizing a pipeline’s throughput
The assertion in Section 25.1 that the throughput of a pipeline is the inverse of its
clock period (which is the sum of the stage delay and latching overhead) is based
on the implicit assumption that the pipeline will be utilized continuously for a
long period of time. Let φ be the probability that a computation is dependent
on the preceding computation so that it cannot be initiated until the results of
its predecessor have emerged from the pipeline. For each such computation
encountered, the pipeline will go unused for σ −1 cycles, where σ is the number
of stages. Derive the optimal number of pipeline stages to maximize the effective
throughput of a pipeline under these conditions.
25.2 Clock rate and pipeline throughput
A four-stage pipeline has stage delays of 17, 15, 19, and 14 ns and a ﬁxed per-
stage latching overhead of 2 ns. The parameter φ, deﬁned as the fraction of
operations that cannot enter the pipeline before the preceding operation has been
completed, is 0.2.
a. What clock cycle time maximizes throughput if stages cannot be further
subdivided? Assume that there is no uncontrolled clock skew.
b. Compare the throughput of part a to the throughput without pipelining.
c. What is the total latency through the pipeline with the cycle time of
part a?
d. What clock cycle time maximizes the throughput with arbitrary subdivisions
allowed within stages? Latches at the natural boundaries above are not to
be removed, but additional latches can be inserted wherever they would be
beneﬁcial.
e. What is the total latency through the pipeline with the assumptions of
part d?
f. Repeat parts a–e, this time assuming an uncontrolled skew of ±1 ns in the
arrival of each clock pulse.
g. The use of a more elaborate clock distribution network, doubling the clock
wiring area (cost) from 20% to 40% of the unpipelined cost g, can virtually
eliminate the uncontrolled clock skew of part f. Would you use the alternate
network? Explain.
25.3 Optimal pipelining
In the analysis of optimal pipelining in Section 25.1, we assumed that pipelining
time and cost overhead per stage are constants. These are simplifying assump-
tions: in fact, the effects of clock skew intensify for longer, more complex stages
and latching overhead increases if the function is sliced indiscriminately at a
large number of points. Discuss the optimal number of pipeline stages with each
of the following modiﬁcations to our original simplifying assumptions.
a. Clock skew increases linearly with stage delay, so that the time or clocking
overhead per stage is τ + tα/σ.

<<<BOOK PAGE 541>>>
540
Chapter 25 High-Throughput Arithmetic
b. Cost overhead per stage, which grows if the logic function is cut at points
other than natural subfunction boundaries, is modeled as a linear function
γ + βσ of the number of stages.
c. Both modiﬁcations given in parts a and b are in effect.
25.4 Wave pipelining
A four-stage pipeline has maximum stage delays of 14, 12, 16, 11 ns, minimum
stage delays of 7, 9, 10, 5 ns, and a ﬁxed per-stage overhead of 3 ns. The parameter
φ deﬁned as the fraction of operations that cannot enter the pipeline before the
preceding operation has been completed, is 0.2.
a. With no controlled clock skew allowed, what are the minimum cycle time
and the resulting latency?
b. If we allow controlled clock skew, what are the minimum cycle time, clock
skews required at the end of each of the four stages, and the overall latency?
c. Repeat parts a and b, this time assuming an uncontrolled skew of ±1 ns in
the arrival of each clock pulse.
25.5 Earle latch logic hazard
The Earle latch shown in Fig. 25.4 has a logic hazard.
a. Show the hazard on a Karnaugh map and determine when it leads to failure.
b. Propose a modiﬁed latch without a hazard and discuss its practicality.
25.6 Latched full adders
a. Present the complete design of a binary full adder with its sum and carry
computations merged with Earle latches.
b. Derive the latching cost overhead with respect to an unlatched full adder and
full adder followed by separate Earle latches.
25.7 Evaluating a pipelined array multiplier
For the pipelined array multiplier design of Fig. 11.18, assume that the full-adder
delay is 8 ns and latching overhead is 3 ns.
a. Find the throughput of the design as shown in Fig. 11.18.
b. Modify the design of Fig. 11.18 to have latches following every 2 full adders
and repeat part a.
c. Modify the design to have latches following every 3 full adders and repeat
part a.
d. Compare the cost-effectiveness of the designs of parts a–c and discuss.
e. The design of Fig. 11.18 can be modiﬁed so that the lower part uses half-
adders instead of full adders. Show how the modiﬁcation should be done and
discuss its implications on optimal pipelining. Assume that the half-adder
delay is 4 ns.

<<<BOOK PAGE 542>>>
Problems
541
25.8 Pipelined ripple-carry adders
In designing a deeply pipelined adder, the ripple-carry design provides a good
starting point. Study the variations in pipelined ripple-carry adders and their
cost-performance implications [Dadd96].
25.9 Optimally pipelined adders
In a particular application, 80% of all additions result from operations on long
vectors and can thus be performed with full pipeline utilization, leading to a
throughput of one addition per clock cycle. The remaining 20% are individ-
ual additions for which the total latency of the pipelined adder determines the
execution rate. Considering each adder type discussed in Chapters 5–7, derive
an optimally pipelined design for the preceding application so that the average
addition time is minimized. Is there any adder type that cannot be effectively
pipelined? Discuss.
25.10 Pipelined multioperand adders
Show that pipelined implementation of a multioperand adder with binary inputs
is possible so that the clock period is dictated by the latency of one full adder
[Yeh96].
25.11 Digit-pipelined incrementer/decrementer
To compute the expression (x −1)/(x + 1) in digit-pipelined fashion, we need
to use an incrementer and a decrementer that feed a divider. Assume the use of
BSD numbers.
a. Present the design of a combined digit-pipelined incrementer/decrementer
unit.
b. Compare your design to a digit-pipelined BSD adder and discuss.
25.12 Digit-pipelined multiplier
The multiplier design shown in Fig. 25.11 is incomplete in two respects. First, it
does not show how the term a−ix−i is accommodated. Second, it does not specify
the alignment of the operands in the three-operand addition or even the width of
the adder.
a. Complete the design of Fig. 25.11 by taking care of the problems just
identiﬁed.
b. Specify additions and modiﬁcations to the design for radix-4 multiplication
using the digit set [−2, 2].
25.13 Digit-pipelined voting circuits
An n-input majority voter produces an output that is equal to a majority of its n
inputs, if such a majority exists; otherwise it produces an error signal. A median
(mean) voter outputs the median (numerical average) of its n inputs.

<<<BOOK PAGE 543>>>
542
Chapter 25 High-Throughput Arithmetic
a. Show how a three-input digit-serial mean voter can be designed if the inputs
are presented in BSD form. What is the latency of your design?
b. Under what conditions can a bit-serial mean voter, with standard binary
inputs, be designed and what would be its latency?
c. Discuss whether, and if so, how a digit-serial majority or median voter with
BSD inputs can be implemented.
d. Repeat part c with standard binary inputs.
25.14 Systolic digit-pipelined multiplier
Design a systolic radix-4 digit-pipelined multiplier structured as in Fig. 25.13
based on the ideas presented in Section 25.6.
25.15 Systolic array multiplier
a. Based on the discussions in Section 25.6, convert the pipelined array
multiplier design of Fig. 11.18 into a fully pipelined systolic array multiplier.
b. Repeat part a, this time assuming that propagation across two cells is
acceptable.
25.16 Delays in on-line arithmetic
Thatdigit-pipelinedadditioncanbeperformedwith1or2cyclesofdelaybetween
input arrival and output production is a direct result of the theories of carry-free
and limited-carry addition developed in Chapter 3.
a. With reference to Fig. 25.10 for digit-pipelined multiplication of BSD
numbers, show that 2 cycles of delay is adequate.
b. Show that digit-pipelined multiplication can be performed with 2–3 cycles
of delay.
c. What would be the delay of a digit-pipelined fused multiply-add unit?
d. Show that digit-pipelined square-rooting can be performed with 1–2 cycles
of delay.
e. Show that digit-pipelined division can be performed with 3–4 cycles of delay.
25.17 On-line adder for BSD numbers
Full adders can be designed to have one or two negatively weighted inputs. The
former (type 1) will have its sum output weighted negatively while the latter
(type 2) will have a negatively weighted carry. Show that one circuit of each of
the two types plus three D latches can be used to implement an on-line adder for
BSD numbers using the (n, p) encoding for the inputs and output.
25.18 On-line arithmetic on complex numbers
Consider numbers represented in radix 2j using the digit set [−2, 2]. This
allows the representation of complex values as a single number. Derive on-line
arithmetic algorithms for operating on such numbers.

<<<BOOK PAGE 544>>>
References and Further Readings
543
25.19 Pipelining throughput
At the beginning of Section 25.1, the latency and cost of a pipelined implemen-
tation were related to the respective parameters of the nonpipelined version as
T = t + στ and G = g + σγ (along with their speciﬁc instances pertaining
to a stage logic delay of 4δ), clearly showing the change in latency and cost.
Write both versions of the equation provided for R in a manner that highlights
the throughput improvement. Discuss.
25.20 Pipelined ﬂoating-point addition
a. You are asked to design a ﬂoating-point adder as a four-stage pipeline. Which
functions would you include in each of the four stages? Fully justify your
answer.
b. Based on your answer to part a, estimate the throughput of your ﬂoating-point
adder.
c. Repeat part a for a four-stage pipelined fused multiply-add unit.
d. Repeat part b for the four-stage pipelined fused multiply-add unit of part c.
25.21 Modiﬁed Earle latch
a. Offer an intuitive explanation as to how the fanning out of the input data d
is avoided in the modiﬁed Earle latch design of [Yang02].
b. Merge the two-level logic function of Fig. 25.5 with the modiﬁed Earle latch
and draw the resulting logic circuit.
c. Compare the circuit of part b with the original design in Fig. 25.5 and
discuss.
REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS
[Burl98]
Burleson, W. P., M. Ciesielski, F. Klass, and W. Liu, “Wave Pipelining: A Tutorial and
Research Survey,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integrated Systems, Vol. 6, No. 3,
pp. 464–474, 1998.
[Dadd96] Dadda, L., and V. Piuri, “Pipelined Adders,” IEEE Trans. Computers, Vol. 45, No. 3,
pp. 348–356, 1996.
[Davi97] Davidovic, G., J. Ciric, J. Ristic-Djurovic, V. Milutinovic, and M. Flynn,
“A Comparative Study of Adders: Wave Pipelining vs. Classical Design,” IEEE
Computer Architecture Technical Committee Newsletter, pp. 64–71, 1997.
[Dube90] Dubey, P. K., and M. J. Flynn, “Optimal Pipelining,” J. Parallel and Distributed
Computing, Vol. 8, pp. 10–19, 1990.
[Erce84]
Ercegovac, M. D., “On-Line Arithmetic: An Overview,” Real-Time Signal Processing
VII, SPIE Conference Proceedings, Vol. 495, pp. 86–92, 1984.
[Erce88]
Ercegovac, M. D., and T. Lang, “On-Line Arithmetic: A Design Methodology and
Applications,” VLSI Signal Processing III (Proceedings of an IEEE workshop),
pp. 252–263, 1988.

<<<BOOK PAGE 545>>>
544
Chapter 25 High-Throughput Arithmetic
[Flyn82]
Flynn, M. J., and S. Waser, Introduction to Arithmetic for Digital Systems Designers,
Holt, Rinehart, & Winston, 1982.
[Flyn95]
Flynn, M. J., Computer Architecture: Pipelined and Parallel Processor Design, Jones
and Bartlett, 1995.
[Frie94]
Friedman, G., and J. H. Mulligan, Jr., “Pipelining and Clocking of High Performance
Synchronous Digital Systems,” in VLSI Signal Processing Technology, M.A.
Bayoumi and E. E. Swartzlander, Jr., (eds.), Kluwer, pp. 97–133, 1994.
[Irwi87]
Irwin, M. J., and R. M. Owens, “Digit-Pipelined Arithmetic as Illustrated by the
Paste-Up System: A Tutorial,” IEEE Computer, Vol. 20, No. 4, pp. 61–73, 1987.
[Kung82] Kung, H. T., “Why Systolic Architectures?” IEEE Computer, Vol. 15, No. 1,
pp. 37–46, 1982.
[Nedj06] Nedjah, N., and L. de Macedo Mourelle, “A Review of Modular Multiplication
Methods and Respective Hardware Implementations,” Informatica, Vol. 30,
pp. 111–129, 2006.
[Parh03]
Parhami, B., and D.-M. Kwai, “Parallel Architectures and Adaptation Algorithms for
Programmable FIR Digital Filters with Fully Pipelined Data and Control Flows,”
J. Information Science and Engineering, Vol. 19, No. 1, pp. 59–74, 2003.
[Walt93] Walter, C. D., “Systolic Modular Multiplication,” IEEE Trans. Computers, Vol. 42,
No. 3, pp. 376–378, 1993.
[Yang02] Yang, S.-S., H.-Y. Lo, T.-Y. Chang, and T.-L. Jong, “Earle Latch Design for High
Performance Pipeline,” IEE Proc. Computers and Digital Techniques, Vol. 149,
No. 6, pp. 245–248, 2002.
[Yeh96]
Yeh, C.-H., and B. Parhami, “Efﬁcient Pipelined Multi-Operand Adders with High
Throughput and Low Latency: Design and Applications,” Proc. 30th Asilomar Conf.
Signals, Systems, and Computers, pp. 894–898, 1996.

<<<BOOK PAGE 546>>>
26
Low-Power Arithmetic
■■■
“Everything should be made as simple as possible,but not simpler.”
A L B E R T E I N S T E I N
■■■
C
lassical computer arithmetic focuses on latency and hardware complexity as the
primary parameters to be optimized or traded off against each other. We saw
in Chapter 25 that throughput is also important and may be considered in design
trade-offs.Recently,power consumption has emerged as a key factor for two reasons:
limited availability of power in small portable or embedded systems and limited
capacity to dispose of the heat generated by fast, power-hungry circuits. In this
chapter,we review low-power design concepts that pertain to the algorithm or logic
design level;as opposed to circuit-level methods,which are outside the scope of this
book.Chapter topics include:
26.1 The Need for Low-Power Design
26.2 Sources of Power Consumption
26.3 Reduction of Power Waste
26.4 Reduction of Activity
26.5 Transformations and Trade-offs
26.6 New and Emerging Methods
26.1 THE NEED FOR LOW-POWER DESIGN
In modern digital systems, factors other than speed and cost have become increasingly
important. For example, portable or wearable computers are severely constrained in
weight, volume, and energy. Whereas weight and volume might seem to be strongly
correlated with circuit complexity or cost, factors external to the circuits themselves often
have greater inﬂuence on these two parameters. For example, packaging, power supply,
and cooling provisions might exhibit variations over different technologies that dwarf
the contribution of the circuit elements to weight and volume. In energy consumption,
545

<<<BOOK PAGE 547>>>
546
Chapter 26 Low-Power Arithmetic
too, logic and arithmetic circuits might be responsible for only a small fraction of the
total usage. Nevertheless, it is important to minimize power wastage and to apply power
saving methods wherever possible.
In portable and wearable electronic devices, energy is at a premium. In round ﬁgures,
lithium-ion batteries offer 0.2 watt-hours of energy per gram of weight (roughly of the
same order as what the widely used standard AAA, AA, or D batteries provide), requir-
ing the average power consumption to be limited to 5–10 W to make a day’s worth of
operation feasible between recharges, given a practical battery weight of under 0.5 kg.
Energy management becomes even more daunting if we focus on personal communica-
tion/computationdeviceswithabatteryweightof50gorless. Typicalcellphonebatteries
weigh 10–20 g, and there is continuous demand for even lighter portable electronic
devices. Newer battery technologies improve the situation only marginally.
This limited energy must be budgeted for computation, storage (primary and sec-
ondary), video display, and communication, making the share available for computation
relatively small. The power consumption of modern microprocessors grows almost lin-
early with the product of die area and clock frequency and today stands at 100–200 W in
high-performance designs. This is 1–2 orders of magnitude higher than what is required
to achieve the aforementioned goal of 5–10 W total power. Roughly speaking, such
processors offer 200–500 MFLOPS (million ﬂoating-point operations per second) of
performance for each watt of power dissipated.
The preceding discussion leads to the somewhat surprising conclusion that reducing
power consumption is also important for high-performance uniprocessor and parallel
systems that do not need to be portable or battery-operated. The reason is that higher
power dissipation requires the use of more complex cooling techniques, which are costly
to build, operate, and maintain. In addition, digital electronic circuits tend to become
much less reliable at high operating temperatures; hence we have another incentive for
low-power design.
While improvements in technology will steadily increase the battery capacity in
portable systems, it is a virtual certainty that increases in die area and clock speed will
outpace the improvements in power supplies. Larger circuit area and higher speed are
direct results of greater demand for functionality as well as increasing emphasis on
computation-intensive applications (e.g., in multimedia), which also require the storage,
searching, and analyzing of vast amounts of data.
Thus, low-power design methods, which are quite important now, will likely rise in
signiﬁcance in the coming years as portable digital systems and high-end supercomputers
become more prevalent.
Figure 26.1 shows the power consumption trend for each MIPS (million instruc-
tions per second) of computational performance in digital signal processor (DSP) chips
[Raba98]. We note that despite higher overall power consumption, there has been a ten-
fold decrease in power consumption per MIPS every 5 years, a trend that has continued
unabated since the year 2000. This reduction is due to a combination of improved power
management methods and lower supply voltages. The 1999–2000 estimates in Fig. 26.1
are for supply voltage of 1–2 V, with current voltages being only marginally lower.
Before proceeding with our discussion of low-power design techniques for arithmetic
circuits, anoteonterminologyisinorder. Low-powerdesignhasemergedasanimportant
focus area in digital systems. There are now books, conferences, and Web sites devoted

<<<BOOK PAGE 548>>>
Sources of Power Consumption
547
1980
1990
2000
10–4
10–3
10–2
10–1
1
Power consumption per MIPS (W)
Figure 26.1 Power consumption trend in DSPs [Raba98].The factor-of-100 improvement per
decade in energy efﬁciency has been maintained since the year 2000.
to low-power design. Reducing power leads to lower energy consumption over a ﬁxed
time span. Very often, however, it is the total energy used for a computation that is
important, not the amount of power drawn at any given time. If we plot the variation
of power consumption over the course of a computation, the peak power is represented
by the highest point on the curve, while energy is the area under the curve. Batteries
are limited in both the maximum power that they can provide and the total energy that
they can store. However, low-power and low-energy designs are somewhat distinct. To
see the difference, let us assume that in a particular arithmetic design, we replace a
high-radix multiplier with a tree multiplier, thereby increasing the power consumption
by a factor of 2, say. If the computation now takes 1/4 the time it did with the high-radix
multiplier, the total energy consumed is reduced by a factor of 2. So, relatively speaking,
the more complex tree multiplier produces a low-energy design, whereas the high-radix
multiplier leads to a low-power design. With this clariﬁcation, we will continue to use
the more widely used qualiﬁer “low-power,” even when we mean “low-energy.” The
distinction will usually be clear from the context.
26.2 SOURCES OF POWER CONSUMPTION
To design low-power arithmetic circuits, we must understand the sources of power dissi-
pation and the relationship of power consumption to other important system parameters.
Some circuit technologies, such as transistor-transistor logic, are quite unsuitable for
low-power designs in view of their relatively high average power consumption. The
inherently low-power complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology,
on the other hand, can be readily adapted to even more stringent power consump-
tion goals. We will limit our discussion to CMOS, which is currently the predominant
implementation technology for both low-cost and high-performance systems.

<<<BOOK PAGE 549>>>
548
Chapter 26 Low-Power Arithmetic
Besides average power consumption, which is limited by the power budgeted for
each subsystem or activity, the peak power consumption is also important in view of its
impact on power distribution and signal integrity [Raba96]. Typically, low-power design
aims at reducing both the average and peak power.
Power dissipation in CMOS digital circuits is classiﬁed as static or dynamic. Static
power dissipation in CMOS circuits, of the types that are used in low-power design
(i.e., excluding certain circuit families that have static currents built in), arises from two
electrical effects. A substantial part of it is due to leakage currents through transistors
with subthreshold voltage; ideal transistors are supposed to be completely off in this
state, conducting only at or above the threshold voltage level. Continual downward
scaling of supply voltages has increased the relative contribution of leakage currents
to the total power dissipation. This is why the supply voltage is not anticipated to go
substantially below the current 1–2 V in the near future. It is noteworthy that leakage
currents increase markedly with rising temperature, a correlation that does not favor
today’s extremely hot circuits. A second contributor to static power dissipation, which is
decreasing in importance due to improvements in dielectric gate insulators, is gate-oxide
leakage. Reducing the static power dissipation of both kinds falls in the realm of circuit
design techniques. Thus, we will not discuss static power dissipation any further.
Dynamic power dissipation in a CMOS device arises from its transient switching
behavior. A small part of such dynamic power dissipation is due to brief short circuits
when both the n- and p-type MOS devices between the supply voltage and ground are
momentarily turned on; ideally, only one of a pair of transistors on the path connecting
the supply voltage to ground should be on at any given time. This part of dynamic power
dissipation can be kept under control by circuit design techniques and by regulating the
signal rise and fall times. This leaves us the dynamic dissipation due to charging and
discharging of parasitic capacitance to contend with.
Switching from ground to the supply voltage V, and back to ground, dissipates a
power equal to CV 2, where C is the capacitance. Thus, the average power consumption
in CMOS can be characterized by the equation
Pavg ≈αfCV 2
where f is the data rate (clock frequency) and α, known as activity, is the average number
of 0-to-1 transitions per clock cycle.
As a numerical example, consider the power consumption of a 32-bit off-chip bus
operating at 5 V and 100 MHz, driving a capacitance of 30 pF per bit. If random values
were placed on the bus in every cycle, we would have α = 0.5. To account for data
correlation and idle bus cycles, let us assume α = 0.2. Then
Pavg ≈αfCV 2 = 0.2 × 108(32 × 30 × 10−12)52 = 0.48 W
Based on the equation for dynamic power dissipation in CMOS digital circuits, once the
data rate f has been ﬁxed, there are but three ways to reduce the power requirements:
1. Using a lower supply voltage V.
2. Reducing the parasitic capacitance C.
3. Lowering the switching activity α.

<<<BOOK PAGE 550>>>
Sources of Power Consumption
549
An alternative to all of the above is to avoid power dissipation altogether, perhaps
through circuit augmentation and redesign, such that the normally dissipated energy
is conserved for later reuse [Atha96]. However, this latter technique, known as adia-
batic switching/charging, is still in its infancy and faces many obstacles before practical
applications can be planned.
Given that power dissipation increases quadratically with the supply voltage, reduc-
tion of V is a highly effective method for low-power design.Agreat deal of effort has been
expended in recent years on the development of low-voltage technologies and design
methods. Unfortunately, however, whereas the transition from 5 V to around 2 V was
achieved simply and with little degradation in performance, lower supply voltages come
with moderate to serious speed penalties and also present problems with regard to com-
patibility with peripheral off-the-shelf components. Some of the resulting performance
degradation can be mitigated by architectural methods such as increased pipeline depth
or parallelism, in effect trading silicon area for lower power. Such methods, which have
made supply voltages hovering around 1 V feasible, are unlikely to allow signiﬁcant
further voltage reductions in the near future.
Parasitic capacitance in CMOS can be reduced by using fewer and smaller devices
as well as sparser and shorter interconnects. Both device-size reduction and interconnect
localization have nontrivial performance implications. Smaller devices, with their lower
drive currents, tend to be slower. Similarly, high-speed designs often imply a certain
number of nonlocal wires. For example, a ripple-carry adder has a relatively small num-
ber of devices and only short local wires, which lead to lower capacitance. However,
the resulting capacitance reduction is usually not signiﬁcant enough for us to altogether
avoid the faster carry-lookahead designs with their attendant long, nonlocal intercon-
nects. This interplay between capacitance and speed, combined with the performance
effects of lower supply voltage, make the low-power design process a challenging global
optimization problem (see Section 26.5).
The preceding points, along with methods for reducing the activity α, as discussed
in Section 26.4, lead to several paradigms that are recurring themes in low-power design
[Raba96]:
Avoiding waste. Glitching, or signals going through multiple transitions before
settling at their ﬁnal values, clocking modules when they are idle, and use of pro-
grammable (rather than dedicated) hardware constitute examples of waste that can
be avoided.
Performance vs. power. Slower circuits use less power, so low-power circuits are
often designed to barely meet performance requirements.
Area (cost) vs. power. Parallel processing and pipelining, with their attendant area
overheads, can be applied to achieve desired performance levels at lower supply
voltage and, thus, lower power.
Exploiting locality. Partitioning the design to exploit data locality improves both
speed and power consumption.
Minimizing signal transitions. Careful encoding of data and state information, along
with optimizations in the order and type of data manipulations, can reduce the
average number of signal transitions per clock cycle and thus lead to lower power

<<<BOOK PAGE 551>>>
550
Chapter 26 Low-Power Arithmetic
consumption. This is where number representations and arithmetic algorithms play
key roles.
Dynamic adaptation. Changing the operating environment based on the input char-
acteristics, selective precomputation of logic values before they are actually needed,
and lazy evaluation (not computing values until absolutely necessary) all affect the
power requirements.
These and other methods of saving power are being actively pursued within the research
community. The following sections discuss speciﬁc examples of these methods in the
context of arithmetic circuits.
In the following sections, we review some generic power reduction strategies that can
be used in many contexts. Speciﬁc designs for arithmetic circuits, such as adders, multi-
pliers, dividers, and square-rooters, are available in the literature. Documents describing
some such designs are cited at the end of the chapter.
26.3 REDUCTION OF POWER WASTE
The most obvious method of lowering the power consumption is to reduce the number
or complexity of arithmetic operations performed. Two multiplications consume more
power than one, and shifting plus addition requires less power than multiplication. Thus,
computing from the expression a(b + c) is better than using ab + ac. Similarly, 16a −a
is preferable to 15a.
Of course, the preceding examples represent optimizations that should be done
regardless of whether power consumption is an issue. In other cases, however, operator
reduction implies a sacriﬁce in speed, thus making the trade-off less clear-cut, especially
if the lost speed is to be recovered by using a higher clock rate and/or supply voltage.
Multiplication of complex numbers provides a good example. Consider the following
complex multiplication:
(a + bj)(c + dj) = (ac −bd) + (ad + bc)j
which requires four multiplications and two additions if implemented directly. The
following equivalent formulation, however, includes only three multiplications, since
c(a + b), which appears in both the real and imaginary parts, needs to be computed
only once:
(a + bj)(c + dj) = [c(a + b) −b(c + d)] + [c(a + b) −a(c −d)]j
The resulting circuit will have a critical path that is longer than that of the ﬁrst design by
at least one adder delay. This method becomes more attractive if c + dj is a constant that
must be multiplied by a given sequence of complex values a(i) +b(i)j. In this case, c+d
and c −d are computed only once, leading to three multiplications and three additions
per complex step thereafter.
When an arithmetic system consists of several functional units, or subcircuits, some
of which remain unused for extended periods, it is advantageous to disable or turn off

<<<BOOK PAGE 552>>>
Reduction of Power Waste
551
Figure 26.2 Saving
power through clock
gating.
Function
   unit
Clock
Enable
Data inputs
Data outputs
Function
   unit
FU inputs
FU output
Mux
Select
Latches
0
1
Figure 26.3 Saving power via guarded evaluation.
si
x i
y i
ci
c0
Carry propagation
pi
x i
y i
si
ci
Figure 26.4 Example of glitching in a ripple-carry adder.
those units through clock gating (Fig. 26.2). The elimination of unnecessary clock activi-
ties inside the gated functional unit saves power, provided the gating signal itself changes
at a much lower rate than the clock. The generation of the gating signals implies some
overhead in terms of both cost and power consumption in the control logic. There may
also be a speed penalty in view of a slight increase in the propagation path for some
signals.
A technique related to clock gating is guarded evaluation (Fig. 26.3). If the output of
a function unit (FU) is relevant only when a particular select signal is asserted, that same
select signal can be used to control a set of latches (or blocking gates) at the input to the
unit. When the select signal is asserted, the latches become transparent; otherwise, the
earlier inputs to the function unit are preserved, to suppress any activity in the unit.
A major source of wasted power in arithmetic and other digital circuits is glitching.
Glitching occurs as a result of delay imbalances in signal propagation paths that lead
to spurious transitions. Consider, for example, the full-adder cell in position i of a
ripple-carry adder (Fig. 26.4). Suppose that ci, pi, and si are initially set to 0s and that

<<<BOOK PAGE 553>>>
552
Chapter 26 Low-Power Arithmetic
Figure 26.5 An array
multiplier with gated
full-adder cells.
p0
p1
p2
p3
p4
p6
p7
p8
0
0
0
p9
p5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
a0
a1
a2
a3
a
x 4
x 3
x 2
x 1
x 0
Carry
Sum
4
both ci and pi are to change to 1 for a new set of inputs. The change in pi takes effect
almostimmediately, whereasthe0-to-1transitionofci mayoccurafteralongpropagation
delay. Therefore, si becomes 1 and is then switched back to 0. This redundant switching
to 1 and then back to 0 wastes power.
Glitching can be eliminated, or substantially reduced, through delay balancing. Con-
sider, for example, the array multiplier of Fig. 26.5. In this multiplier, each cell has four
inputs, rather than three for a standard full adder, because one input to the full adder is
internally computed as the logical AND of the upper-horizontal and vertical inputs. The
diagonal output is the sum and the lower-horizontal output is the carry.
Tracing the signal propagation paths in Fig. 26.5, we ﬁnd that the lower-horizontal
carry input and the diagonal sum input into the cell at the intersection of row xi and
column aj both experience a critical path delay of 2i + j cells, whereas the other input
signals arrive with virtually no delay from the primary inputs. This difference can cause
signiﬁcant glitching. To reduce the power waste due to this glitching, one can insert
delays along the paths of the vertical and horizontal broadcast inputs, ai and xj. Placing
1 and 2 units of delay within each cell on the horizontal and vertical broadcast lines,
respectively, balances all the signal paths. The latency of the array multiplier will increase
as a result of this delay balancing.
Similar methods of delay balancing can be applied to fast tree multipliers. How-
ever, deriving the delay-balanced design is somewhat harder for the latter in view of
their irregular structures leading to signal paths with varying delays. Some delay bal-
ancing methods for such multipliers are given in [Saku95], where it is concluded that
a power saving of more than 1/3 is feasible. Delay balancing methods for tree mul-
tipliers were studied even before their implications for power consumption became
important. For example, we saw in Section 11.2, that balanced-tree multipliers were
developed to facilitate the synthesis of partial product reduction trees from identical bit
slices.

<<<BOOK PAGE 554>>>
Reduction of Activity
553
Pipelining also helps with glitch reduction and thus can lead to power savings. In
a pipelined implementation, the logic depth within each pipeline segment can be made
fairly small, leading to reduced opportunities for glitching. Existence of nodes that are
deep, on the other hand, virtually guarantees that glitching will occur, both because of
variations in signal path lengths and as a result of the deeper circuit nodes being within
the cone of inﬂuence of a larger number of primary inputs. The effects of pipelining are
further discussed in Sections 26.5 and 26.6.
26.4 REDUCTION OF ACTIVITY
Reduction of the activity α can be accomplished by a variety of methods.An examination
of the effects of various information encoding schemes makes a good starting point.
Consider, for example, the effect of 2’s-complement encoding of numbers versus signed-
magnitude encoding during negation or sign change. A signed-magnitude number is
negated by simply ﬂipping its sign bit, which involves minimal activity. For a 2’s-
complement number, on the other hand, many bits will change on the average, thus
creating a great deal of activity. This does not mean, however, that signed-magnitude
number representation is always better from the standpoint of power consumption. The
more complex addition/subtraction process for such numbers may nullify some or all of
this gain.
As another example of the effect of information encoding on power consumption,
consider the design of a counter. Standard binary encoding of the count implies an
average of about two transitions, or bit inversions, per cycle. Counting according to a
Gray code, in which the representation of the next higher or lower number always differs
from the current number in exactly one bit position, reduces the activity by a factor of
2. This advantage exists in unidirectional counting as well as in up/down counting.
One can generalize from this and examine energy-efﬁcient state encoding schemes for
sequential machines. If the states of a sequential machine are encoded such that states
frequently visited in successive transitions have adjacent codes, the activity will be
reduced.
The encoding scheme used might have an effect on power consumption in the imple-
mentation of high-radix or redundant arithmetic, as well. Each high-radix or redundant
digit is typically encoded in multiple bits. We saw in Section 3.4, for example, that the
particular encoding used to represent the binary signed-digit set [−1, 1] has signiﬁcant
speed and cost implications. Power consumption might also be factored in when select-
ing the encoding. Very little can be said in general about power-efﬁcient encodings.
Distribution and correlation of data have signiﬁcant effects on the optimal choice.
Generally speaking, shared, as opposed to dedicated, processing elements and data
paths tend to increase the activity and should be avoided in low-power design if possible.
If a wire or bus carries a positively correlated data stream on successive cycles, then
switching activity is likely to be small (e.g., the high-order bits of numbers do not
change in every cycle). If the same wire or bus carries elements from two independent
data streams on alternate cycles, there will be signiﬁcant switching activity, as each bit
will change with probability 1/2 in every cycle.

<<<BOOK PAGE 555>>>
554
Chapter 26 Low-Power Arithmetic
Figure 26.6
Reduction of activity
by precomputation.
Arithmetic
  circuit
m bits
n – m bits
Precomputation
n inputs
Output
Load enable
Figure 26.7
Reduction of activity
via Shannon
expansion.
n – 1 inputs
  Function
     unit 
for x     = 0
  Function
     unit 
for x     = 1
Select
x n–1
Mux
0        1
n–1
n–1
Reordering of operations sometimes helps reduce the activity. For example, in adding
a list of n numbers, separating them into two groups of positive and negative values,
adding each group separately, and then adding the results together is likely to lead to
reduced activity. Interestingly, this strategy also minimizes the effect of round-off errors,
so it is doubly beneﬁcial.
Amethod known as precomputation can sometimes help reduce the activity. Suppose
we want to evaluate a function f of n variables such that the value of f can often be
determined from a small number m of the n variables. Then the scheme depicted in
Fig. 26.6 can be used to reduce the switching activity within the main computation
circuit. In this scheme, a smaller “prediction” circuit detects the special cases in which
the value of f actually depends on the remaining n −m variables, and only then allows
these values to be loaded into the input registers. Since the precomputation circuit is
added to the critical path, this scheme does involve a speed penalty in addition to the
obvious cost overhead.
A variant of the precomputation scheme is to decompose a complicated computation
into two or more simpler computations based on the value of one or more input variables.
For example, using the Shannon expansion of a function around the input variable xn−1
leads to the implementation shown in Fig. 26.7. Here, the input register is duplicated
for n −1 of the n variables and the value of xn−1 is used to load the input data into one
or the other register. The obvious overhead in terms of registers is unavoidable in this

<<<BOOK PAGE 556>>>
Transformations and Trade-Offs
555
scheme. The overhead in the computation portion of the circuit can be minimized by
proper selection of the expansion variable(s).
26.5 TRANSFORMATIONS AND TRADE-OFFS
Many power-saving schemes require that some other aspect of the arithmetic circuit,
such as its speed or simplicity, be sacriﬁced. In this section, we look at some trade-offs
of this nature.
Replacing the commonly used single-edge-triggered ﬂip-ﬂops (that load data at the
rising or falling edge of the clock signal) by double-edge-triggered ﬂip-ﬂops would
allow a factor-of-2 reduction in the clock frequency. Since clock distribution constitutes
a major source of power consumption in synchronous systems, this transformation can
lead to savings in power at the cost of more complex ﬂip-ﬂops. Flip-ﬂops can also be
designed to be self-gating, so that if the input of the ﬂip-ﬂop is identical to its output, the
switching of its internal clock signal is suppressed to save power. Again, a self-gating
ﬂip-ﬂop is more complex than a conventional one.
Parallelism and pipelining are complementary methods of increasing the throughput
of an arithmetic circuit. A two-way parallel circuit or a two-stage pipelined circuit can
potentially increase the throughput by a factor of 2. Both methods can also be used to
reduce the power consumption.
Consider an arithmetic circuit, such as a multiplier, that is required to operate at the
frequency f ; that is, it must perform f operations per second.Astandard design, operating
atvoltageV, isshowninFig. 26.8a. Thepowerdissipationofthisdesignisproportionalto
fCV 2, as discussed in Section 26.2, where C is the effective capacitance. If we duplicate
Clock
Arithmetic
  circuit
f
Frequency = f
Capacitance = C
Voltage = V
Power = P
Frequency = 0.5f
Capacitance = 2.2C
Voltage = 0.6V
Power = 0.396P
Frequency = f
Capacitance = 1.2C
Voltage = 0.6V
Power = 0.432P
Circuit
copy 1
Circuit
copy 2
Mux
Circuit
stage 1
Circuit
stage 2
Clock
f
Register
Input reg.
Input reg.
Output reg.
Output reg.
Clock
f
Select
Input reg.
Clock
f
Output reg.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 26.8 Reduction of power via parallelism or pipelining.

<<<BOOK PAGE 557>>>
556
Chapter 26 Low-Power Arithmetic
the circuit and use each copy to operate on alternating input values, as shown in Fig.
26.8b, then the required operating frequency of each copy becomes f /2. This increases
the effective capacitance of the overall circuit to 2.2C, say, but allows the slower copies
to use a lower voltage of 0.6V, say. The net effect is that the power is reduced from P
to (0.5 × 2.2 × 0.62)P = 0.396P while maintaining the original performance.
An alternative power reduction architecture with pipelining is shown in Fig. 26.8c.
Here, the computation is sliced into two stages, each only half as deep as the original
circuit. Thus, voltage can again be reduced from V to 0.6V, say. The hardware overhead
of pipelining increases the capacitance to 1.2C, say, while the operating frequency f
remains the same. The net effect is that power is reduced from P to (1 × 1.2 × 0.62)P =
0.432P while maintaining the original performance in terms of throughput.
The possibility of using parallelism or pipelining to save power is not always easily
perceived. Consider, for example, the recursive computation
y(i) = ax(i) + by(i−1)
where the coefﬁcients a and b are constants. For this ﬁrst-order, inﬁnite impulse response
(IIR) ﬁlter, the circuit implementation shown in Fig. 26.9a immediately suggests itself.
The operating frequency of this circuit is dictated by the latency of a multiply-add
operation.
The method that allows us to apply parallelism to this computation is known as
loop unrolling. In this method, we essentially compute the two outputs y(i) and y(i+1)
simultaneously using the equations:
y(i) = ax(i) + by(i−1)
y(i+1) = ax(i+1) + abx(i) + b2y(i−1)
The preceding equations lead to the implementation shown in Fig. 26.9b which, just
like the parallel scheme of Fig. 26.8b, can operate at a lower frequency, and thus at
x (i)
×
+
×
a
b
(a) Simple
y (i–1)
y (i)
x
×
+
×
a
(b) Unrolled once
b
y
(i)
×
+
×
a
b
y
y (i–2)
2
×
ab
y (i–3)
x
(i–1)
(i)
(i–1)
Figure 26.9 Realization of a ﬁrst-order IIR ﬁlter.
