<<<BOOK PAGE 558>>>
Transformations and Trade-Offs
557
a lower voltage, without affecting the throughput. The new operating frequency will
be somewhat lower than f /2 because the three-operand adder in Fig. 26.9b is slower
than a two-operand adder. However, the difference between the operating frequency and
f /2 will be negligible if the three-operand adder is implemented by a carry-save adder
followed by a standard two-operand adder.
Retiming, or redistribution of delay elements (registers) in a design, is another
method that may be used to reduce the power consumption. Note that retiming can
also be used for throughput enhancement, as discussed in connection with the design of
systolic arithmetic function units in Section 25.6. As an example of power implications
of retiming, consider a fourth-order, ﬁnite impulse response (FIR) ﬁlter characterized
by the following equation:
y(i) = ax(i) + bx(i−1) + cx(i−2) + dx(i−3)
Figure 26.10a shows a straightforward realization of the ﬁlter. The frequency at which
the ﬁlter can operate, and thus the supply voltage, is dictated by the latency of one
multiplication and three additions. The number of addition levels can be reduced to two
by using a two-level binary tree of adders, but the resulting design is less regular and
more difﬁcult to expand in a modular fashion.
An alternative design, depicted in Fig. 26.10b, moves the registers to the right side
of the circuit, thereby making the stage latency equal to that of one multiplication and
one addition. The registers now hold
u(i−1) = dx(i−1)
v(i−1) = cx(i−1) + dx(i−2)
w(i−1) = bx(i−1) + cx(i−2) + dx(i−3)
y(i−1) = ax(i−1) + bx(i−2) + cx(i−3) + dx(i−4)
x(i)
a
x (i–1)
x (i–3)
b
d
(a) Original
×
×
×
+
+
y (i)
y (i–1)
x (i–2)
c
×
+
(b) Retimed
x (i)
a
b
d
×
×
×
+
+
y (i)
y (i–1)
c
×
+
u(i)
v (i–1)
w (i–1)
u(i–1)
Figure 26.10 Possible realizations of a fourth-order FIR ﬁlter.

<<<BOOK PAGE 559>>>
558
Chapter 26 Low-Power Arithmetic
This alternate computation scheme allows a higher operating frequency at a given supply
voltage or, alternatively, a lower supply voltage for a desired throughput. The effect of
this transformation on the capacitance is difﬁcult to predict and will depend on the
detailed design and layout of the arithmetic elements.
26.6 NEW AND EMERGING METHODS
Clearly, the reduction of dynamic power dissipation, which was the focus of our dis-
cussion in Sections 26.3–26.5, is not the only relevant criterion when contemplating
low-power designs. Efforts in this area must deal with a spectrum of methods rang-
ing from the architecture to the individual wires and transistors. As extensive data on
the power requirements of various arithmetic circuits and design styles is gathered and
published, we can make more informed judgments about design alternatives and the
associated trade-offs. References at the end of this chapter include a representative sam-
ple of studies that compare adders, multipliers, and dividers of various kinds with regard
to their power requirements and energy efﬁciency. Findings reported in these publica-
tions mostly conﬁrm the intuitive judgments of experienced arithmetic designers, but
they are at times counterintuitive and surprising. For example, faster arithmetic circuits
can be more energy-efﬁcient under certain circumstances [Vrat05], provided that they
can be deactivated when not in use.
A promising approach to the design of low-power arithmetic circuits is through the
use of power-optimized building blocks of various kinds. For example, a wide class
of useful arithmetic circuits can be built by using lookup tables, multiplexers (muxes),
parallel compressors (3-to-2 and/or 4-to-2), and fast carry networks. The development
of low-power variants for these component types allows us to put together candidate
designs quickly, and then focus on global optimizations for removing redundancies
and improving interactions among the components. For example, binary full adders
(components used for Wallace, Dadda, and other multioperand reduction trees) have
been extensively studied with regard to their power consumption attributes [Bui02],
[Lin07], [Saye04]. Similarly, carry-propagate adders have been compared by a number
of researchers [Nage96], [Vrat05]. Unconventional number representations, such as the
logarithmic number system [Pali02], offer certain power savings and must be considered
within the design space. Note that a logarithmic arithmetic unit (Fig. 18.8) can be readily
synthesized from the building blocks just mentioned.
As examples of emerging methods, with the potential of offering signiﬁcant energy
savings in the future, we will brieﬂy discuss asynchronous circuits, wave pipelining, and
reversible computation in the rest of this section.
Asynchronous digital circuits have been studied for many years. Despite advan-
tages in speed, distributed (localized) control, and built-in capability for pipelining,
such circuits are not yet widely used. The only exceptions are found in bus handshaking
protocols, interrupt handling mechanisms, and the design of certain classes of high-
performance, special-purpose systems (wave front arrays). Localized connections and
elimination of the clock distribution network give asynchronous circuits an edge in
power consumption. This observation, along with improvements in the asynchronous

<<<BOOK PAGE 560>>>
New and Emerging Methods
559
Figure 26.11 Part of
an asynchronous
chain of
computations.
Local
control
Local
control
Local
control
Arithmetic
  circuit
Arithmetic
  circuit
Arithmetic
  circuit
Data
ready
Data
Release
circuit design methodologies and reduced overhead may bring such circuits to the fore-
front in the design of general-purpose digital systems. However, before this happens,
design/synthesis tools and testing methods must be improved.
In asynchronous circuits, timing information is embedded in, or travels along with,
the data signals. Each function unit is activated when its input data becomes available
and in turn notiﬁes the next unit in the chain when its results are ready (Fig. 26.11).
In the bundled data protocol, a “data ready” or “request” signal is added to a bundle
of data lines to inform the receiver, which then uses an “acknowledge” line to release
the sending module. In the two-rail protocol, each signal is individually encoded in a
self-timed format using two wires. The latter approach essentially doubles the number
of wires that go from module to module, but has the advantage of being completely
insensitive to delay.
The best form of asynchronous design from the viewpoint of low power uses dual-
rail data encoding with transition signaling: two wires are used for each signal, with
a transition on one wire indicating that a 0 has arrived and a transition on the other
designating the arrival of a 1. Level-sensitive signaling is also possible, but because
the signal must return to 0 after each transaction, its power consumption would be
higher.
Wave pipelining, discussed in Section 25.2, affects the power requirements for two
reasons. One reason is that the careful balancing of delays within each stage, which is
required for maximum performance, also tends to reduce glitching. A second, more
important, reason is that in a wave-pipelined system, a desired throughput can be
achieved at a lower clock frequency. Like asynchronous circuit design, wave pipelining
is not yet widely used. However, as problems with this method are better understood and
automatic synthesis tools are developed, application of wave pipelining may become

<<<BOOK PAGE 561>>>
560
Chapter 26 Low-Power Arithmetic
B
C
T
(a) Toffoli gate
A
B
C
FRG
(b) Fredkin gate
A
B
P = A
FG
(c) Feynman gate
A
B
C
PG
(d) Peres gate
P =A 
P = A 
A
P = A
Q = B
R = A B ⊕ C
Q = A ⊕ B
Q = A B ⊕ A C
R = A C ⊕ A B
Q = A ⊕ B
R = A B ⊕ C
Figure 26.12 Some reversible logic gates.
B
0
C
1
0
+
A
Cout
s
B
A
G
s
Figure 26.13 Reversible binary full adder built of ﬁve Fredkin gates,with a single Feynman
gate used to fan out the input B.The label“G”denotes“garbage.”
commonplace in the design of high-performance digital systems, with or without power
considerations.
The ultimate in low-power design is devising circuits that waste no energy in the form
of heat. The second law of thermodynamics guarantees that a logically and physically
reversible circuit dissipates no heat. Logical reversibility means that given the circuit’s
outputs, we can uniquely determine its inputs. Conventional logic is not reversible:
knowing the values of both A ∨B and A ∧B is inadequate for deducing the values of the
inputs A and B. Theoretically, we can perform many computations in reversible form,
using circuit elements known as reversible gates. Some examples of reversible gates
are depicted in Fig. 26.12. Any reversible gate has the same number of input and output
lines, and it implements a permutation from input values (combinations) to output values.
For example, a full adder circuit built of reversible logic gates is shown in Fig. 26.13.
Several avenues, such as adiabatic switching, optical logic, and quantum computing, are
being pursued for realizing reversible logic circuits. However, practical implementations
appear to be many years, if not decades, away.
PROBLEMS
26.1 Clock-related power dissipation
Estimate the power dissipation associated with clock distribution in a 250-MHz
processor chip operating at 3.3 V if the die dimensions are 1 cm × 1.3 cm, the
length of the 1-µm-wide clock distribution network is roughly four times the
die’s perimeter, and the parasitic capacitance of the metal layer is 1 nF/mm2.
How will the power dissipation be affected if the chip’s technology is scaled
down by a factor of 1.4 in all dimensions, assuming that the supply voltage and

<<<BOOK PAGE 562>>>
Problems
561
frequency remain the same? Hint: Capacitance of a wire is directly proportional
to its area.
26.2 Power implications of other optimizations
Many of the methods considered in earlier chapters for increasing the operation
speed or reducing the hardware cost have implications for power consumption.
Furthermore, reduction in power consumption is not always in conﬂict with other
optimizations.
a. Provide an example of a speed enhancement method that also reduces power.
b. Describe a speed enhancement method that substantially increases power.
c. Provide an example of a cost-saving method that also leads to reduced power.
d. Describe a cost reduction method that substantially increases power.
26.3 Saving power by operator reduction
Consider the complex-number multiplication scheme discussed at the beginning
of Section 26.3.
a. Can a similar method be applied to synthesizing a 2k × 2k multiplier from
k × k multipliers? Discuss.
b. What about rotating a series of vectors by the constant angle θ using the
familiar transformations X = x sin θ + y cos θ and Y = x cos θ −y sin θ?
26.4 Saving power by operation reordering
a. The expression u + 2−8v + 2−10w, with the ﬁxed-point fractional operands
u, v, and w, is to be evaluated using two adders. What is the best order of
evaluation from the standpoint of minimizing signal transitions? Does the
best order depend on whether the numbers are signed?
b. Generalize the result of part a to the addition of n fractions, where the
magnitude of the ith fraction is known to be in [0, 2−mi).
26.5 Saving power by reduction and reordering
Rearrange the accompanying computation to reduce the power requirements. If
more than one rearrangement is possible, compare them with respect to operation
complexity (power), latency, and cost.
×
×
×
×
+
+
+
x
x
a
x
b
x
c
26.6 Saving power via delay balancing
The array multiplier of Fig. 26.5 is different from the one shown in Fig. 11.14 and
in some ways inferior to it. Compare the two designs with respect to worst-case
delay and glitching, before and after the application of delay balancing.

<<<BOOK PAGE 563>>>
562
Chapter 26 Low-Power Arithmetic
26.7 Reduction of activity by bus-invert encoding
Bus-invert encoding is a scheme whereby a single wire is added to a bus to
designate polarity: a polarity of 0 indicates that the desired data is on the bus,
whereas a polarity of 1 means that the complement of the desired data is being
transmitted.
a. Draw a complete block diagram of this scheme, including all units needed
on the sender and receiver sides.
b. Discussthepower-savingimplicationsofthismethod. Then, usingreasonable
assumptions about the data, try to quantify the extent of savings achieved.
26.8 Saving power via precomputation
a. Apply the precomputation scheme of Fig. 26.6 to the design of a 32-bit integer
comparator that determines whether x > y. Assume 2’s-complement inputs
and use the sign bit plus 2 magnitude bits for the precomputation. Hint: Invert
the sign bits and compare as unsigned integers.
b. Repeat part a, this time assuming signed-magnitude inputs.
26.9 Power implications of pipelining
a. Suppose that in the design of Fig. 26.9b, the three-operand adder is to be
implemented by means of a pair of two-operand adders. The critical path of
the circuit will then become longer than that in the original circuit before
unrolling. Show how circuit throughput can be maintained or improved by
conversion into a two-stage pipeline.
b. Repeat part a for an implementation of the IIR ﬁlter of Fig. 26.9a that uses
two steps of unrolling.
26.10 Parallelism and pipelining
a. Choose three convergence computation methods from among those discussed
in Chapters 16, 21, and 23. Discuss opportunities that might exist for power
savings in these computations through parallelism and/or pipelining.
b. Compare convergence and digit-recurrence methods with regard to their
power requirements.
26.11 Arithmetic by table lookup
In Chapter 24, we saw that table-lookup methods can be highly cost-effective
for certain arithmetic computations.
a. What are the power consumption implications of arithmetic by table lookup?
b. Can you think of any power-saving method for use with tabular implemen-
tations?
26.12 A circuit technique for power reduction
In CMOS circuit implementation of symmetric functions, such as AND, OR,
or XOR, the logically equivalent input nodes may differ in their physical

<<<BOOK PAGE 564>>>
Problems
563
characteristics. For example, the inputs of a four-input AND gate may have
different capacitances.
a. How is this observation relevant to the design of low-power arithmetic
circuits?
b. Describe an application context for which this property may be exploited to
reduce power. Hint: Look at the ﬁlter implementations of Section 26.5.
26.13 Power considerations in fast counters
Consider the power consumption aspects of the fast counter designs of
Section 5.5. Compare the designs with each other and with standard counters
and discuss.
26.14 Bit-serial versus parallel arithmetic
Study the power efﬁciency aspects of bit-serial, digit-serial, and bit-parallel arith-
metic. What would be a good composite ﬁgure of merit incorporating speed, cost,
and power?
26.15 Power implications of arithmetic methods
Based on what you have learned in this chapter, identify power consumption
implications, if any, of the following design choices. Justify your answers.
a. Multiplication with and without Booth’s recoding.
b. Floating-point versus logarithmic number representation.
c. Restoring versus nonrestoring division or square-rooting.
26.16 Low-power division
Contrast convergence and digit-recurrence division methods from the viewpoint
of power consumption, and discuss power reduction strategies that might be
applicable in each case. Begin by studying the approach taken in [Nann99].
26.17 Signal transition probabilities
If inputs to a two-input NAND gate randomly assume the values 0 and 1 in each
clock cycle, the transition probability at the output will be 3/16.
a. Prove the claim above and extend the result to an h-input NAND gate.
b. Derive corresponding results for h-input AND and OR gates.
c. Derive corresponding results for two-input XOR gates.
d. State and prove a general result for two-input NAND gates, when the inputs
assume the value 1 with probability p and the value 0 with probability 1 −p
in each clock cycle.
26.18 Power implications of RNS arithmetic
Argue that residue number system (RNS) arithmetic is likely to require lower
power than conventional signed-magnitude or 2’s-complement arithmetic, pro-
vided that we can ignore the conversion and reconversion overheads; i.e., assume

<<<BOOK PAGE 565>>>
564
Chapter 26 Low-Power Arithmetic
that the sequence of arithmetic operations performed in RNS mode is long enough
to render the aforementioned overheads insigniﬁcant. Present your arguments in
terms of the likely impact of RNS on the following key parameters: activity (α),
clock frequency (f ), parasitic capacitance (C), supply voltage (V).
26.19 Reversible logic gates
Every reversible logic gate has an inverse that maps the outputs of the original
gate to its inputs. For each of the four reversible logic gates depicted in Fig. 26.12,
derive the inverse logic gate.
26.20 Reversible full-adder circuit
a. By deriving logic expressions for all intermediate lines in Fig. 26.13, verify
that the circuit does in fact compute the sum and carry bits of a full adder.
b. Show the design of a reverse circuit that regenerates the inputs of the circuit
in Fig. 26.13, when provided with its outputs.
c. As in part a, verify that the circuit of part b does indeed regenerate the desired
inputs.
26.21 Green supercomputing
The most powerful supercomputers of the early Twenty-ﬁrst Century dissipate
more than 1 MW of power. This high power consumption leads to excessive oper-
ational costs for energy supply and cooling. Using Internet resources, prepare a
two-page report on current efforts to make supercomputers more energy-efﬁcient.
Include in your report a discussion on how the share of energy devoted to
arithmetic operations might be reduced.
REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS
[Atha96] Athas, W. C., “Energy-Recovery CMOS,” in Low-Power Design Methodologies,
J. M. Rabaey and M. Pedram (eds.), pp. 65–100, Kluwer, 1996.
[Beni01] Benini, L., G. De Micheli, and E. Macii, “Designing Low-Power Circuits: Practical
Recipes,” IEEE Circuits and Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 6–25, 2001.
[Bui02]
Bui, H. T., Y. Wang, and Y. Jiang, “Design and Analysis of Low-Power 10-Transistor
Full Adders Using Novel XOR-XNOR Gates,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems II,
Vol. 49, No. 1, pp. 25–30, 2002.
[Call96]
Callaway, T. K., and E. E. Swartzlander, Jr., “Low Power Arithmetic Components,” in
Low-Power Design Methodologies, J. M. Rabaey and M. Pedram (eds.), pp. 161–200,
Kluwer, 1996.
[Chan95] Chandrakasan, A. P., and R. W. Broderson, Low Power Digital CMOS Design,
Kluwer, 1995.
[Gonz96] Gonzalez, R., and M. Horowitz, “Energy Dissipation in General-Purpose
Microprocessors,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, pp. 1277–1284, 1996.

<<<BOOK PAGE 566>>>
References and Further Readings
565
[Huan05] Huang, Z., and M. D. Ercegovac, “High-Performance Low-Power Left-to-Right
Array Multiplier Design,” IEEE Trans. Computers, Vol. 54, No. 3, pp. 245–252,
2005.
[Kim03]
Kim, N. S., et al., “Leakage Current: Moore’s Law Meets Static Power,” IEEE
Computer, Vol. 36, No. 12, pp. 68–75, 2003.
[Kuro99] Kuroda, T., and T. Sakurai, “Low Power CMOS VLSI Design,” Chap. 24 in Digital
Signal Processing for Multimedia Systems, ed. by K. K. Parhi and T. Nishitani,
pp. 693–739, Marcel Dekker, 1999.
[Lin07]
Lin, J.-F., Y.-T. Hwang, M.-H. Sheu, and C.-C. Ho, “A Novel High-Speed and Energy
Efﬁcient 10-Transistor Full Adder Design,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems I,
Vol. 54, No. 5, pp. 1050–1059, 2007.
[Mudg01] Mudge, T., “Power: A First-Class Architectural Design Constraint,” IEEE Computer,
Vol. 34, No. 4, pp. 52–58, 2001.
[Nage96] Nagendra, C., M. J. Irwin, and R. M. Owens, “Area-Time-Power Tradeoffs in Parallel
Adders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems II, Vol. 43, No. 10, pp. 689–702, 1996.
[Nann99] Nannarelli, A., and T. Lang, “Low-Power Divider,” IEEE Trans. Computers, Vol. 48,
No. 1, pp. 2–14, 1999.
[Pali02]
Paliouras, V., and T. Stouraitis, “Computer Arithmetic Techniques for Low-Power
Systems,” in Designing CMOS Circuits for Low Power, D. Soudris, C. Piguet, and
C. Goutis (eds.), pp. 97–116, Kluwer, 2002.
[Parh96]
Parhi, K. K., and F. Catthoor, “Design of High-Performance DSP Systems,” in
Emerging Technologies: Designing Low-Power Digital Systems, R. K. Cavin III and
W. Liu (eds.), pp. 447–507, IEEE Press, 1996.
[Raba96] Rabaey, J. M., M. Pedram, and P. E. Landman, “Introduction,” in Low-Power Design
Methodologies, J. M. Rabaey and M. Pedram (eds.), pp. 1–18, Kluwer, 1996.
[Raba98] Rabaey, J. M. (ed.), “VLSI Design and Implementation Fuels the Signal Processing
Revolution,” IEEE Signal Processing, Vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 22–37, 1998.
[Saku95] Sakuta, T., W. Lee, and P. Balsara, “Delay Balanced Multipliers for Low Power/Low
Voltage DSP Core,” Digest IEEE Symp. Low-Power Electronics, pp. 36–37, 1995.
[Saye04] Sayed, A., and H. Al-Asaad, “Survey and Evaluation of Low-Power Full-Adder
Cells,” Proc. Int’l Conf. VLSI, pp. 332–338, 2004.
[Soud02] Soudris, D., C. Piguet, and C. Goutis (eds.), Designing CMOS Circuits for Low
Power, Kluwer, 2002.
[Vrat05]
Vratonjic, M., B. R. Zeydel, and V. G. Oklobdzija, “Low- and Ultra Low-Power
Arithmetic Units: Design and Comparison,” Proc. Int’l Conf. Computer Design,
pp. 249–252, 2005.
[Wilt04]
Wilton, S. J. E., S.-S. Ang, and W. Luk, “The Impact of Pipelining on Energy per
Operation in Field-Programmable Gate Arrays,” in Field Programmable Logic and
Applications, LNCS #3203, pp. 719–728, Springer, 2004.
[Yeap98] Yeap, G., Practical Low Power Digital VLSI Design, Kluwer, 1998.

<<<BOOK PAGE 567>>>
27
Fault-Tolerant
Arithmetic
■■■
“If two men on the same job agree all the time,then one is useless.
If they disagree all the time,then both are useless”
DAR RY L F. Z ANUC K
■■■
M
odern digital components are remarkably robust, but with a great many of
themputtogetherinacomplexarithmeticsystem,thingscananddogowrong.
Indatacommunication,aper-biterrorprobabilityofaround10−10 isconsideredquite
good. However, at a rate of many millions of arithmetic operations per second, such
an error probability in computations can lead to several bit-errors per second.While
coding techniques are routinely applied to protect against errors in data transmission
or storage,the same cannot be said about computations performed in an arithmetic
circuit. In this chapter, we examine key methods that can be used to improve the
robustness and reliability of arithmetic systems.Chapter topics include:
27.1 Faults,Errors,and Error Codes
27.2 Arithmetic Error-Detecting Codes
27.3 Arithmetic Error-Correcting Codes
27.4 Self-Checking Function Units
27.5 Algorithm-Based Fault Tolerance
27.6 Fault-Tolerant RNS Arithmetic
27.1 FAULTS,ERRORS,AND ERROR CODES
So far, we have assumed that arithmetic and logic elements always behave as expected:
an AND gate always outputs the logical AND of its inputs, a table entry maintains its
correct initial value, and a wire remains permanently connected. Even though modern
566

<<<BOOK PAGE 568>>>
Faults, Errors, and Error Codes
567
integrated circuits are extremely reliable, faults (deviations from speciﬁed or correct
functional behavior) do occur in the course of lengthy computations, especially in sys-
tems that operate under harsh environmental conditions, deal with extreme/unpredictable
loads, or are used during long missions. The output of an AND gate may become per-
manently “stuck on 1,” thus yielding an incorrect output when at least one input is 0.
Furthermore, cross talk or external interference may cause the AND gate to suffer a
“transient fault” in which its output becomes incorrect for only a few clock cycles. A
table entry may become corrupt as a result of manufacturing imperfections in the memory
cells or logic faults in the read/write circuitry. Because of overheating, a manufacturing
defect, or a combination of both, a wire may break or short-circuit to another wire.
Ensuring correct functioning of digital systems in the presence of (permanent and
transient) faults is the subject of the fault-tolerant computing discipline, also known
as reliable (dependable) computing [Parh94]. In this chapter, we review some ideas in
fault-tolerant computing that are particularly relevant to the computation of arithmetic
functions.
Methods of detecting or correcting data errors have their origins in the ﬁeld of
communications. Early communications channels were highly unreliable and extremely
noisy. So signals sent from one end were often distorted or changed by the time they
reached the receiving end. The remedy, thought up by communications engineers, was
to encode the data in redundant formats known as “codes” or “error codes.” Examples
of coding methods include adding a parity bit (an example of a single-error-detecting or
SED code), checksums, and Hamming single-error-correcting, double-error-detecting
(SEC/DED) code. Today, error-detecting and error-correcting codes are still used exten-
sively in communications, for even though the reliability of these systems and noise
reduction/shielding methods have improved enormously, so have the data rates and data
transmission volumes, making the error probability nonnegligible.
Codes originally developed for communications can be used to protect against stor-
age errors. When the early integrated-circuit memories proved to be less reliable than
the then-common magnetic core technology, integrated circuit designers were quick to
incorporate SEC/DED codes into their designs.
The data processing cycle in a system whose storage and memory-to-processor data
transfers are protected by an error code can be represented as in Fig. 27.1. In this
scheme, which is routinely applied to modern digital systems, the data manipulation
part is unprotected. Decoding/encoding is necessary because common codes are not
closed under arithmetic operations. For example, the sum of two even-parity numbers
does not necessarily have even parity. As another example, when we change an element
within a list that is protected by a checksum, we must compute a new checksum that
replaces the old one.
One way to protect the arithmetic computation against fault-induced errors is to
use duplication with comparison of the two results (for single fault/error detection) or
triplication with 2-out-of-3 voting on the three results (for single fault masking or error
correction). Figure 27.2 shows possible ways for implementing such duplication and
triplication schemes.
In Fig. 27.2a, the decoding logic is duplicated along with the arithmetic logic unit
(ALU), to ensure that a single fault in the decoder does not go undetected. The encoder,
on the other hand, remains a critical element whose failure will lead to undetected errors.

<<<BOOK PAGE 569>>>
568
Chapter 27 Fault-Tolerant Arithmetic
Protected
     by 
encoding
Input
Encode
Send
Store
Send
Decode
Output
Manipulate
Unprotected
     
Figure 27.1 A common way of applying information coding techniques.
Figure 27.2
Arithmetic fault
detection or fault
tolerance (masking)
with replicated units.
Coded
inputs
Decode
    1
Decode
    2
ALU
  1
ALU
  2
Compare
Mismatch
detected
Encode
Coded
outputs
Coded
inputs
Decode
    1
Decode
    2
ALU
  1
ALU
  2
Decode
    3
ALU
  3
Vote
Encode
Coded
outputs
Non-codeword
detected
Non-codeword
detected
(a) Duplication and comparison
(b) Triplication and voting

<<<BOOK PAGE 570>>>
Faults, Errors, and Error Codes
569
However, since the output of the encoder is redundant (coded), it is possible to design the
encoding circuitry in a way that ensures the production of a non-codeword at its output if
anything goes wrong. Such a design, referred to as self-checking, leads to error detection
by the checker associated with the memory subsystem or later when the erroneous stored
value is used as an input to the ALU. Assuming the use of a self-checking encoder, the
duplicated design in Fig. 27.2a can detect any error resulting from a fault that is totally
conﬁned within one of the blocks shown in the diagram. This includes the “compare”
block whose failure may produce a false alarm. An undetected mismatch would require
at least two faults in separate blocks.
The design with triplicated ALU in Fig. 27.2b is similar. Here, the voter is a critical
element and must be designed with care. Self-checking design cannot be applied to
the voter (as used here), since its output is nonredundant. However, by combining the
voting and encoding functions, one may be able to design an efﬁcient self-checking voter-
encoder. This three-channel computation strategy can be generalized to n channels to
permit the tolerance of more faults. However, the cost overhead of a higher degree of
replication becomes prohibitive.
Since the preceding replication schemes involve signiﬁcant hardware overheads, one
might attempt to apply coding methods for fault detection or fault tolerance within the
ALU. The ﬁrst issue we encounter in trying to use this approach is that single, double,
burst, and other error types commonly dealt with in communications do not provide
useful characterizations for arithmetic. Whereas a spike due to noise may affect a single
bit (random error) or a small number of consecutive bits (burst error), a single erroneous
carry signal within an adder (caused, e.g., by a faulty gate in the carry logic) may produce
an arbitrary number of bit inversions in the output. Figure 27.3 provides an example.
We see in the example of Fig. 27.3 that a single fault in the adder has caused 12 of the
sum bits to be inverted. In coding theory parlance, we say that the Hamming distance
between the correct and incorrect results is 12 or that the error has a Hamming weight
(number of 1s in the XOR of the two values) of 12.
Error detection and correction capabilities of codes can be related to the minimum
Hamming distance between codewords as exempliﬁed by the following:
Single-error-detecting (SED)
Min. Hamming distance = 2
Single-error-correcting (SEC)
Min. Hamming distance = 3
SEC/DED
Min. Hamming distance = 4
Figure 27.3 How a
single carry error can
produce an arbitrary
number of bit-errors
(inversions) in
the sum.
Unsigned addition
0010 0111 0010 0001
+ 0101 1000 1101 0011
Correct sum
0111 1111 1111 0100
Erroneous sum
1000 0000 0000 0100
Stage generating an
erroneous carry of 1

<<<BOOK PAGE 571>>>
570
Chapter 27 Fault-Tolerant Arithmetic
For example, in the case of SED codes, any 1-bit inversion in a codeword is guaranteed
not to change it to another codeword, thus leading to error detection. For SEC, a 1-bit
inversion leads to an invalid word that is closer (in terms of Hamming distance) to the
original correct codeword than to any other valid codeword, thus allowing for error
correction.
From the addition example in Fig. 27.3, we see that even if some “single-error-
detecting code” were closed under addition, it would be incapable of detecting the
erroneous result in this case. We note, however, that in our example, the erroneous
sum differs from the correct sum by 24. Since in computer arithmetic we deal with
numbers as opposed to arbitrary bit strings, it is the numerical difference between the
erroneous and correct values that is of interest to us, not the number of bits in which they
differ.
Accordingly, we deﬁne the arithmetic weight of an error as the minimum number
of signed powers of 2 that must be added to the correct value to produce the erroneous
result (or vice versa). Here are two examples:
Correct result
0111 1111 1111 0100
1101 1111 1111 0100
Erroneous result
1000 0000 0000 0100
0110 0000 0000 0100
Difference (error)
16 = 24
−32 752 = −215 + 24
Error, in minimum-
0000 0000 0001 0000
-1000 0000 0001 0000
weight BSD form
Arithmetic weight
1
2
of the error
Type of error
Single, positive
Double, negative
Hence, the errors in the preceding examples can be viewed as “single” and “double”
errors in the arithmetic sense. Special arithmetic error codes have been developed that
are capable of detecting or correcting errors that are characterized by their arithmetic,
rather than Hamming, weights. We review some such codes in Sections 27.2 and 27.3.
Note that a minimum-weight binary signed-digit (BSD) representation of a k-bit
error magnitude has at most ⌈(k + 1)/2⌉nonzero digits and can always be written in
canonic BSD form without any consecutive nonzero digits. The canonic form of a BSD
number, which is unique, is intimately related to the notion of arithmetic error weight.
27.2 ARITHMETIC ERROR-DETECTING CODES
Arithmetic error-detecting codes:
1. Are characterized in terms of the arithmetic weights of detectable errors.
2. Allow us to perform arithmetic operations on coded operands directly.
The importance of the ﬁrst property was discussed at the end of Section 27.1. The
second property is crucial because it allows us to protect arithmetic computations against
circuit faults with much lower hardware redundancy (overhead) than full duplication or
triplication.

<<<BOOK PAGE 572>>>
Arithmetic Error-Detecting Codes
571
In this section, we discuss two classes of arithmetic error-detecting codes: prod-
uct codes and residue codes. In both cases we will assume unsigned integer operands.
Extension of the concepts to signed integers and arbitrary ﬁxed-point numbers is straight-
forward. Codesforﬂoating-pointnumberstendtobemorecomplicatedandhavereceived
limited attention from arithmetic and fault-tolerance researchers.
Product codes
In a product code, also known as AN code, a number N is represented as the product
AN, where the check modulus A is a constant. Verifying the validity of an AN-coded
operand requires checking its divisibility by A. For odd A, all weight-1 arithmetic errors
(including all single-bit errors) are detected. Arithmetic errors of weight 2 and higher
may not be detectable. For example, the error 32 736 = 215 −25 is not detectable
with A = 3, 11, or 31, since the error magnitude is divisible by each of these check
moduli.
Encoding/decoding of numbers with product codes requires multiplication/division
by A. We will see shortly that performing arithmetic operations with product-coded
operands also requires multiplication and division by A. Thus, for these codes to be
practically viable, multiplication and division by the check modulus A should be simple.
We are thus led to the class of low-cost product codes with check moduli of the form
A = 2a −1.
Multiplication by A = 2a −1 is simple because it requires a shift and a subtract. In
particular, if the computation is performed a bits at a time (i.e., digit-serially in radix
2a), then one needs only an a-bit adder, an a-bit register to store the previous radix-2a
digit, and a ﬂip-ﬂop for storing the carry. Division by A = 2a −1 is similarly simple
if done a bits at a time. Given y = (2a −1)x, we ﬁnd x by computing 2ax −y. The
ﬁrst term in this expression is unknown, but we know that it ends in a zeros. This is all
that we need to compute the least-signiﬁcant a bits of x based on the knowledge of y.
These computed bits of x form the next a bits of 2ax, allowing us to ﬁnd the next a bits
of x, etc.
Since A = 2a −1 is odd, low-cost product codes can detect any weight-1 arithmetic
error. Some weight-2 and higher-weight errors may go undetected, but the fraction of
such errors becomes smaller with an increase in A. Unidirectional errors, in which all
erroneous bits are 0-to-1 or 1-to-0 inversions (but not both), form an important class of
errors in digital circuit implementations. For unidirectional errors, the error magnitude
is the sum of several powers of 2 with the same signs.
THEOREM 27.1 Any unidirectional error with arithmetic weight not exceeding
a −1 is detectable by a low-cost product code that uses the check modulus
A = 2a −1.
For example, the low-cost product code with A = 15 can detect any weight-2 or weight-
3 unidirectional arithmetic error in addition to all weight-1 errors. The following are
examples of weight-2 and weight-3 unidirectional errors that are detectable because the

<<<BOOK PAGE 573>>>
572
Chapter 27 Fault-Tolerant Arithmetic
resulting error magnitude is not a multiple of 15:
8 + 4 = 12
128 + 4 = 132
16 + 4 + 2 = 22
256 + 16 + 2 = 274
Product codes are examples of nonseparate, or nonseparable, codes in which the original
data and the redundant information for checking are intermixed. In other words, the
original number N is not immediately apparent from inspecting its encoded version AN
but must be obtained through decoding (in this case, division by the check modulus A).
Arithmetic operations on product-coded operands are quite simple. Addition or
subtraction is done directly, since
Ax ± Ay = A(x ± y)
Direct multiplication results in
Aa × Ax = A2ax
So the result must be corrected through division by A. For division, if z = qd + s, with
q being the quotient and s the remainder, we have
Az = q(Ad) + As
So, direct division yields the quotient q along with the remainder As. The remainder
is thus obtained in encoded form, but the resulting quotient q must be encoded via
multiplication by A. Because q is obtained in nonredundant form, an error occurring in
its computation will go undetected. To keep the data protected against errors in the course
of the division process, one can premultiply the dividend Az by A and then divide A2z
by Ad as usual. The problem with this approach is that the division leads to a quotient
q* and remainder s* satisfying
A2z = q∗(Ad) + s∗
which may be different from the expected resultsAq and A2s (the latter needing correction
through division by A). Since q∗can be larger than Aq by up to A −1 units, the quotient
and remainder obtained from normal division may need correction. However, this again
raises the possibility of undetected errors in the handling of the unprotected value q∗,
which is not necessarily a multiple of A.
A possible solution to the preceding problem, when one is doing the division a
bits at a time for A = 2a −1, is to adjust the last radix-2a digit of q∗in such a way
that the adjusted quotient q∗∗becomes a multiple of A. This can be done rather easily
by keeping a modulo-A checksum of the previous quotient digits. One can prove that
suitably choosing the last radix-2a digit of q∗∗in [−2a + 2, 1] is sufﬁcient to correct the
problem. A subtraction is then needed to convert q∗∗to standard binary representation.
Details can be found elsewhere [Aviz73].

<<<BOOK PAGE 574>>>
Arithmetic Error-Detecting Codes
573
Square-rooting leads to a problem similar to that encountered in division. Suppose
that we multiply the radicand Az by A and then use a standard square-rooting algorithm
to compute
⌊

A2x⌋= ⌊A√x⌋
Since the preceding result is in general different from the correct result A⌊√x⌋, there
is a need for correction. Again, the computed value ⌊A√x⌋can exceed the correct root
A⌊√x⌋by up to A −1 units. So, the same correction procedure suggested for division is
applicable here as well.
Residue codes
In a residue code, an operand N is represented by a pair of numbers (N, C(N)), where
C(N) = N mod A is the check part. The check modulus A is a constant. Residue codes
are examples of separate or separable codes in which the data and check parts are not
intermixed, thus making decoding trivial. Encoding a number N requires the computa-
tion of C(N) = N mod A, which is attached to N to form its encoded representation
(N, C(N)).
As in the case of product codes, we can deﬁne the class of low-cost residue codes,
with A = 2a −1, for which the encoding computation N mod A is simple: it requires
that a-bit segments of N be added modulo 2a −1 (using an a-bit adder with end-around
carry). This can be done digit-serially by using a single adder or in parallel by using a
binary tree of a-bit 1’s-complement adders.
Arithmetic operations on residue-coded operands are quite simple, especially if a
low-cost check modulus A = 2a −1 is used. Addition or subtraction is done by operating
on the data parts and check parts separately. That is
(x, C(x)) ± (y, C(y)) = (x ± y, (C(x) ± C(y)) mod A)
Hence, as shown in Fig. 27.4, an arithmetic unit for residue-coded operands has a main
adder for adding/subtracting the data parts and a small modulo-A adder to add/subtract
the residue checks. To detect faults within the arithmetic unit, the output of this small
    Main 
arithmetic
processor
   Check 
processor
x
y
C(x)
C(y)
z
Compare
mod
C(z)
Error
indicator
A
Figure 27.4 Arithmetic processor with residue checking.

<<<BOOK PAGE 575>>>
574
Chapter 27 Fault-Tolerant Arithmetic
modular adder (check processor) is compared with the residue of the output from the
main adder.
Multiplication of residue-coded operands is equally simple, since
(a, C(a)) × (x, C(x)) = (a × x, (C(a) × C(x)) mod A)
So, again, the structure shown in Fig. 27.4 is applicable. This method of checking
the multiplication operation is essentially what we do when we verify the correctness of
our pencil-and-paper multiplication result by casting out nines.
Just as in residue number system (RNS) arithmetic, division and square-rooting are
complicated with residue-coded operands. For these operations, the small residue check
processor cannot operate independently from the main processor and must interact with
it to compute the check part of the result. Details are beyond the scope of this chapter.
As in product codes, choosing any odd value for A guarantees the detection of all
weight-1 arithmetic errors with residue codes. However, residue codes are less capable
than product codes for detecting multiple unidirectional errors. For example, we saw
earlier that the 15N code can detect all weight-2 and weight-3 unidirectional arithmetic
errors. The residue code with A = 15 cannot detect the weight-2 error resulting from
0-to-1 inversion of the least-signiﬁcant bit of the data as well as the least-signiﬁcant bit
of the residue. This error goes undetected because it adds 1 to the data as well as to the
residue, making the result a valid codeword.
To correct the preceding problem, inverse residue codes have been proposed for
which the check part represents A −(N mod A) rather than N mod A. In the special
case of A = 2a −1, the check bits constitute the bitwise complement of N mod A.
Unidirectional errors now affect the data and check parts in opposite directions, mak-
ing their detection more likely. By noting that attachment of the a-bit inverse residue
C′(N) = A −(N mod A) to the least-signiﬁcant end of a k-bit number N makes the
resulting (k + a)-bit number a multiple of A = 2a −1, the following result is easily
proven.
THEOREM 27.2 Any unidirectional error with arithmetic weight not exceeding
a−1 is detectable by a low-cost inverse residue code that uses the check modulus
A = 2a −1.
The added cost or overhead of an error-detecting code has two components:
The increased word width for coded operands adds to the cost of registers, memory,
and data links.
Checked arithmetic or wider operands make the ALU more complex.
With respect to the ﬁrst component of cost, product, residue, and inverse residue codes
are similar. For example, the low-cost versions of these codes with the check modulus
A = 2a −1 all require a additional bits to represent the coded operands. With regard to
arithmetic, residue and inverse residue codes are simpler than product codes for addition
and multiplication and more complex for division.
It is interesting to note that the residue-class codes are the only possible separable
codes for checking an adder [Pete58]. Also, it has been proven that bitwise logical

<<<BOOK PAGE 576>>>
Arithmetic Error-Correcting Codes
575
operations such as AND, OR, and XOR cannot be checked by any coding scheme with
less than 100% redundancy; that is, the best we can do for error detection in logical
operations is duplication and comparison [Pete59], as in Fig. 27.2a.
27.3 ARITHMETIC ERROR-CORRECTING CODES
We illustrate the main ideas relating to arithmetic error-correcting codes by way of
examples from the class of biresidue codes. A biresidue code represents a number N as
the triple (N, C(N), D(N)), where the check components C(N) = N mod A and D(N) =
N mod B are residues with respect to the check moduli A and B. If the original number
requires k bits for its binary representation, its biresidue-coded representation would
need k + ⌈log2A⌉+ ⌈log2B⌉bits.
Encoding for the class of biresidue codes is similar to that of single-residue codes,
except that two residues must be computed. Addition and multiplication of biresidue-
coded operands can be performed by an arithmetic processor similar to that shown in
Fig. 27.4, but with two check processors. Since the two residues can be computed and
checked in parallel, no speed is lost.
Consider errors that affect the number N or only one of the residues, say C(N). Such
errors can be corrected as follows:
Error in C(N). In this case, C(N) will fail the residue check, while D(N) passes its
check; C(N) can then be corrected by recomputing N mod A.
Error in N. Unless the error magnitude happens to be a multiple of A and/or B (thus
being either totally undetectable or else indistinguishable from a residue error), both
residue checks will fail, thus pointing to N as the erroneous component. To correct
such errors, the differences between Nwrong mod A (Nwrong mod B) and C(N) (D(N))
must be noted. The two differences, [(Nwrong mod A) −C(N)] mod A and [(Nwrong
mod B) −D(N)] mod B, constitute an error syndrome. The error is then correctable
if the syndromes for different errors are distinct.
Consider, as an example, a biresidue code with the low-cost check moduli A = 7 and
B = 15. Table 27.1 shows that any weight-1 arithmetic error E with |E| ≤2048 leads
to a unique error syndrome, thus allowing us to correct it by subtracting the associated
error value from Nwrong. For |E| ≥4096, the syndromes assume the same values as for
E/4096. Hence, weight-1 error correction is guaranteed only for a 12-bit data part. Since
the two residues require a total of 7 bits for their representations, the redundancy for this
biresidue code is 7/12 ≈58%.
A product code with the check modulus A × B = 7 × 15 = 105 would similarly
allow us to correct weight-1 errors via checking the divisibility of the codeword by 7
and 15 and noting the remainders. This is much less efﬁcient, however, since the total
word width must be limited to 12 bits for full error coverage. The largest representable
number is thus 4095/105 = 39. This is equivalent to about 5.3 bits of data, leading to a
redundancy of 127%.
In general, a biresidue code with relatively prime low-cost check moduli A = 2a −1
and B = 2b −1 can support a data part of ab bits for weight-1 error correction with

<<<BOOK PAGE 577>>>
576
Chapter 27 Fault-Tolerant Arithmetic
Table 27.1 Error syndromes for weight-1 arithmetic errors in
the (7, 15) biresidue code.
Error syndrome
Error syndrome
Positive
Negative
error
Mod 7
Mod 15
error
Mod 7
Mod 15
1
1
1
−1
6
14
2
2
2
−2
5
13
4
4
4
−4
3
11
8
1
8
−8
6
7
16
2
1
−16
5
14
32
4
2
−32
3
13
64
1
4
−64
6
11
128
2
8
−128
5
7
256
4
1
−256
3
14
512
1
2
−512
6
13
1024
2
4
−1024
5
11
2048
4
8
−2048
3
7
4096
1
1
−4096
6
14
8192
2
2
−8192
5
13
16384
4
4
−16384
3
11
32768
1
8
−32768
6
7
a representational redundancy of (a + b)/(ab) = 1/a + 1/b. Thus, with a choice of
suitably large values for a and b, the redundancy can be kept low.
Based on our discussion of arithmetic error-detecting and error-correcting codes,
we conclude that such codes are effective not only for protecting against fault-induced
errors during arithmetic computations but also for dealing with storage and transmission
errors. Using a single code throughout the system obviates the need for frequent encod-
ing and decoding and minimizes the chance of data corruption during the handling of
unencoded data.
27.4 SELF-CHECKING FUNCTION UNITS
Aself-checkingfunctionunitcanbedesignedwithorwithoutencodedinputsandoutputs.
For example, if in Fig. 27.4, x mod A and y mod A are computed internally, as opposed
to being supplied as inputs, a self-checking arithmetic unit with unencoded input/output
is obtained.
The theory of self-checking logic design is quite well developed and can be used to
implement highly reliable, or at least fail-safe, arithmetic units. The idea is to design
the required logic circuits in such a way that any fault, from a prescribed set of faults
that we wish to protect against, either does not affect the correctness of the outputs
(is masked) or else leads to a non-codeword output (is made observable). In the latter
case, the invalid result is either detected immediately by a code checker attached to the
unit’s output or else is propagated downstream by the next self-checking module that

<<<BOOK PAGE 578>>>
Self-Checking Function Units
577
is required to produce a non-codeword output for any non-codeword input it receives
(somewhat similar to computation with not-a-numbers in ﬂoating-point arithmetic).
An important issue in the design of such self-checking units is the ability to build
self-checking code checkers that are guaranteed not to validate a non-codeword despite
internal faults. For example, a self-checking checker for an inverse residue code (N,
C′(N)) might be designed as follows. First, N mod A is computed. If the input is a valid
codeword, this computed value must be the bitwise complement of C′(N). We can view
the process of verifying that xb−1 · · · x1x0 is the bitwise complement of yb−1 · · · y1y0
as that of ensuring that the signal pairs (xi, yi) are all (1, 0) or (0, 1). This amounts to
computing the logical AND of a set of Boolean values that are represented using the
following 2-bit encoding:
1
encoded as
(1, 0) or (0, 1)
0
encoded as
(0, 0) or (1, 1)
Note that the code checker produces two outputs that carry (1, 0) or (0, 1) if the input
is correct and (0, 0) or (1, 1) if it is not. It is an easy matter to design the required
AND circuit such that no single gate or line fault leads to a (1, 0) or (0, 1) output for a
non-codeword input. For example, one can build an AND tree from the two-input AND
circuit shown in Fig. 27.5. Note that any code checker that has only one output line
cannot be self-checking, since a single stuck-at fault on its output line can produce a
misleading result.
Fault detection can also be achieved by result checking. This is similar to what, in
the ﬁeld of software fault tolerance, is known as acceptance testing. An acceptance test
is a (hopefully simple) veriﬁcation process. For example, the correct functioning of a
square-rooter can be veriﬁed by squaring each obtained root and comparing the result to
the original radicand. If we assume that any error in the squaring process is independent
from, and thus unlikely to compensate for, errors in the square-rooting process, a result
that passes the veriﬁcation test is correct with very high probability.
Acceptance tests do not have to be perfect. A test with imperfect coverage (e.g.,
comparing residues) may not detect each fault immediately after it occurs, but over time
will signal a malfunctioning unit with high probability. On the other hand, if we assume
that faults are permanent and occur very rarely, then periodic, as opposed to concurrent
or on-line, veriﬁcation might be adequate for fault detection. Such periodic checks might
Figure 27.5
Two-input AND
circuit,with 2-bit
inputs (xi, yi) and
(xj, yj),for use in a
self-checking code
checker.
x
y i
i
x
y j
j
